    MAURITANIAN ARABIC
Communication and Culture Handbook




                        Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                PEACE CORPS
                         LANGLIAtlE HANDBOOK SERIES


Me series includes language materials in Belizean Creole, Gilbertese.
Mauritanian Arabic,  Setswana, Solomon Islands Pijin. and Tanzanian
                                  Swahili

These Mauritanian Arabic materials were d( eloped undt r the auspices
of the Foreign Language Office of The Experiment in International
Living's School for International Training.
Project director :10(1 editor                             Raymond C. Clark
Assistant director and editorial assistant              Arthur A. Burrows
 dMinistr.11 ive a' sist.rtlt                                    Susan McBean

For further information. contact The Experiment Press, Brattleboro,
Vermont 0:3301.
Much of the classic calligraphy used         decorate this book was taken
from The Mu slim Mind by Chris WaddV




The Experiment in International Living; Inc.. prepared this handbook
    the U S Go eminent under AC NON Contract number 78-043-1037.
The repr. Juction of any part of this handbook other than for such
purposes as criticism, comment. news reporting, teaching, scholarship,:
research. or other 'fair use" is subject to the prior written permission
of ACTION.
                                    197)




                                                      Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                           MAURITANIAN ARABIC

                COMMUNICATION AND CULTURE HANDBOOK

Writers                                                 Stephen Hanchey
                                                      Timothy P. Francis
Artists                                       George Vasilatos, Pat Moran
Typists                                     Georg( Vasilatos, Lisa Forrett
Field Tester and Nssistant Writer                                 Peg Clement
Consultants                                                Lance Lindabury
                                                             Mouldi Hadiji


                             _Acknowledgements


     The writers would like to extend their grateful appreciation to the
dedicated volunteers ond staff of Peace Corps Mauritania for their sup-
port and encouragement during the preparation of these materials. We
would likt to mention in particular Gem Sternin and Carol Olsen of
l'c Mauritania. as well as Lee Jennings and Tanya George of PC/
tVashinglon. whose experience and help have again proved invaluable.
 he staff ,)f. the Regional Training Resource Center in Dakar including
            r. Gary Englebert and Boubacar Diallou helped facilitate our
work.
      FincdlY   our warmest appreciation to Voussouf ould Abdel Jelil.
Alidellahi    uld Mohammed Lehbib. Abdellahi Kerlin and other Mauritanian
frien k and colleagues in Nouakchott. Dakar, Rabat. and London who
made their time available as hosts. translators. and consultants.
     ,ut thL it generosity and kindness. this work would have been im-
PC' 'bible.




                                                     Hosted for free on livelingua.com
Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                          TABLE OF CONTENTS
Preface To The Learner: Introduction to Language Learning                       vii
Introduction to the Languages of Mauritania                                     xiii
The Pronunciation of the Hassaniva Dialect                                      xiv
The Communication & Culture Handbook: Parts of a Typical Lesson                xvii
Lesson 1:                                                                           .,
              Greetings
              Standard Arabic Greetings & Responses                                10

Lesson 2:     Continuing a Conversation                                            12
              Numbers 1-10                                                         18

Lesson 3:     Basic Personal Information                                          20
              Map of Mauritania                                                   24
              Numbers 11-20                                                       26

Lesson 4:     Age. Marital Status & Family Information                            28
              Days uf the Week                                                    32
              Numbers 20-100                                                      33

Lesson 5.     Shopping: Inquiring About Av&ilabilitv                              36
              Numbers 100-1.000                                                   40

Lesson 6-     Shopping:   Making a Request                                        44
              F runs and Vegetables                                               49

Lesson 7:     Jobs ind Occupations                                                52
              Namt.,, of Occupations                                              56
              Numbers 1.000-1.000.000                                             58

Lesson 8:     Talking About Duration & Learning Arabic                            60
              Language Learning Vocabulary                                        65

Lesson .:4    TnIking About & Learning Arabic                                     68
              Idioms and Useful Expressions                                       72

Lesson 10:    Making. Tea                                                         74
              Verbs of Proce' and Function                                        79

Lesson 11:    Talking About Where You Live                                        80
              Names of Places & Landmarks                                         84
              Map cat Nouakchott                                                  86

Lesson 12:    Taking a Taxi                                                       88
              Prepositions for Locating                                           92

Lesson 13:    fhe Volunteer Role in Development                                   94
              Names N Term,' in Devel,pment                                       98


                                   )::\.!.




                                                       Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                             6
Lesson 14:     Telling Time                                                    102
               Hours of The Clock                                              106
               Understanding Time in the Arab World                            110

Lesson 15:     Future Appointments                                             112

Lesson 16:     Daily Activities                                                 116

Lesson 17:     Describing Observations                                         122
               Colors                                                          129

Lesson 18:     Hospitality and Courtesy                                        132

Lesson 19:     Learning About Islam                                            137
               Religious Vocabulary                                            140

Lesson 20:    Talking About Religion in the U.S.                                142

Lesson 21-    Describing Past Events and Activities                            148
              Grammar Note - The Past Tense                                    152

Lesson 22:    Describing Your Past                                             154
              School Subjects                                                  159

Lesson 23:    Weather. Climate and Seasons                                     160

Lesson 24:    I'rip to Boutilimit                                              166
              Life in the Desert-Vocabulary                                    170

Lesson 25:    Parts of the Body                                                172
              Health & Symptoms of Illness                                     176

Lesson 26:    At the Tailor's                                                  178

Lesson 27:    House & Basic Furnishings                                        184

Lesson 28:    Health Interview                                                 190
              Health Glossary                                                  194

Lesson 29:    Agricultural Talk                                                198
              Agricultural Glossary                                            202
              Name of Months                                                   206

Lesson 30:    In the Field                                                     208

Appendix A:   Hassaniya Proverbs                                               213

Appendix B:   Language Behavioral Objectives                                   215

English-Hassa-qya Glossary                                                     217



                                  *vi*

                                                   Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                       Preface To The Learner

An Introduction to Language Learning
      Congratulations to all of you who read this. First, con-
gratulations for your acceptance into Peace Corps and second,
congratulations for just performing a very complex act        read-
ing a language. Of course, the language is English and that
hardly seems like such a major accomplishment; after all, prac-
tically everybody you know can do it. For most of us, using
English is like breathing, an involuntary activity, or if we con-
sider it a skill, a skill that has become so natural to us that we
have taken for granted the fact that it represents the major in-
tellectual achievement of our lifetimes.
      The point, of course, is not that the learning of English is
in itself an especially significant accomplishment, but that the
learning of a language in either or both its spoken and written
forms is the great accomplishment. By being born as human
beings we may be programmed .to learn language just as we are
programmed to walk on only two legs but despite our human in-
heritance, learning a language still requires time and energy.
We don't just happen to learn a language; we do have to work
at it, and other people -- chiefly our parents, siblings and
playmates -- have to be willing to help.
     Although you may no longer have memories of your early
struggles to learn English, you can still appreciate the com-
plexity of the accomplishment by considering this: Assume for
the moment that you are about to siert a language training pro-
gram that will occupy you 12-14 hours a day, 7 days a week
for the next 3 to 5 years. without a break. At the end of
your training program you will still not be able to understand
radio programs of easily follow d conversation between two
adults and practical!; all books will still seem to be filled with
undecipherable squiggles. In f Ict, your knowledge of the writ-
ten language will be so minimal that you w ill now have to enroll
in a formal school for a considerable length of time and even
after several years of formal schooling you will still be develop- ...undecipherable sluilles..
ing your language skills by learning new words, polishing your
writing style and trying to read better. That is the sort of
language program you enrolled in when you began to learn your
native language, English.




                                                  L)
                                                                  Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                  All this is not intended to frighten you about the language
                             learning task that lies ahead because learning a second lan-
                             guage is going to be easier. Most of you have already en-
                             countered a second language and unless that encounter came
                             early in your life while you were still very actively learning
                             your first language, the second encounter was an encounter of
                             a different kind. Some of you may have learned French or
                             Spanish and learned it reasonably well in high school, while
                             others have not had very successful experiences the second
                             time around. Now, as an adult you are being asked to learn a
                             new, second language.    Learning a second language is no small
                             task, but neither is it a matter of starting from scratch, as you
                             did when you learned English. So before you take your first
                             steps in your new language, we ask you to take the time to do
                             two things: try to understand the nature of the task ahead of
                             you and try to assess the personal strengths and weaknesses
                             that you bring with you as you start your assignment.
                                  What do you have to do to learn a new language? As you
                             might expect, the answers to this question are as numerous and
                             varied as people are and no two learners' strategies will be ex-
                             actly the same. This is so important to remember, let's say it
                             again in a different way: we can make many generalizations
                             about the way people learn language, but you are unique and
                             you can only learn in the way that suits you best, not in the
                             way an idealized, generalized member of your species learns.
                                   We have already said that learning a second language is
                             going to be easier. It is going to be faster, too, because you
                             already know a language and you will not have to re-invent
                             one. To be sure, the language you are going to learn is very
                             different from English and you n ay wonder just how much help
                             your English is going to be. It would be easier, for example,
                             if there were more cognates such as between English and the
                             Germanic or Romance languages, but you already know a lot
                             about languages and English in particular, and you can use
                             that knowledge. You already know, for example, that lan-
                             guages have a two-part structure (subject and predicate) and
                             you already know a great deal about what you can and cannot
                             communicate with languages. You know how to do things such
                             as re-phrase a statement for a young child, use a new word in
                             a sentence, ask for meanings, use gestures to re-inforce lan-
                             guage, and employ circumlocutions. In short, you have been
                             involved in communication all your life and you are not chang-
           ,                 ing to a new medium, you are just switching channels.
... switching channels.. .
                                  You still ma-). not be convinced that learning a new lan-
                             guage is easy: obviously it does require an effort and no one
                             needs to tell you that some people have to make more of an ef-
                             fort than others. We have tried to encourage you to realize
                             that your learning style will not be the same as your fellow


                                                          *viii*

                                                                   Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                                              9
students. If each of us were to draw a language profile of our-
selves we would find that our profiles, just like our per-
sonalities are different; strong and sharp in some areas, weak
and ill-defined in others. The point, however, is not how
strong or weak you may be -- or how fast or slow you may be
at learning languages -- but rather that you should examine
your own profile, find out where you are strong and weak and
use that information to capitalize on your strengths and try to
accept and even improve on your weaknesses. To help you be-
gin your self-assessment as a language learner, we suggest you
give some thought to the following aspects of language learning.
       Memorizing.    Are you good at memorizing? Obviously,
 learning a new language requires much more than memorizing a
 dictionary of that language, but having a good memory will
 help. The chief way in which it helps of course is in learning                      ,,---74
new words and phrases so that the right ones come quickly and
easily tc mind when you need them. When you store something
 in your mind for later use, put a "tag" on it; relate it to some-
thing that is already stored and accessible. When you first en-
counter a new word, explore it: hear it, say it, see it, feel
it. Re-cycle your collection. In language learning, using a                                     !.*1
new expression once is usually not enough. And don't be dis-                     taste. it if you can
couraged if you forget things. Your mind can only handle so
much at once and sometimes unused stuff gets thrown out to
make room for new things, but even the forgotten words have
probably left a trace so that the second time you learn them
they may stay longer        .



        Beiilg receptive.        The new language may have
sounE7 Its grammar may be organized differentlysome "funny"
                                                 from Eng-
lish.   It may have words that do not translate easily into Eng-
lish and some English words and concepts may not have direct
equivalents with the new language. Try to remember that
English is only a language and your new language is a language
in its own right.
        Taking risks.           Inevitably, you will make plenty of mis-
takes, and adults do not like to make mistakes, especially in
front of other adults. But learning a new language is as much
a process of learning what not to say as it is learning what to
say.  You will have to develop some willingness to go out on a
limb and try things and not be upset if the limb breaks.
        Being relaxed. Trying too hard, and wanting too much to
succeed -- T'preing," as athletes say -- can be a serious pro- ...so cut on a. lank
blem for a language learner. Sometimes the antidote is a good                                           .




stiff drink, but there are others. What's yours?




                                                i0                  Hosted for free on livelingua.com       .q
                                        Using the language. Another way of saying this is: prac-
                                  tice makes perfect. The more you do something the better you
                                  get at it and this is especially true of learning a new skill such
                                  as a language. Obviously, one way in which you can get a lot
                                  of practice is by taking a full and active part in the classroom.
                                  But there are other people in the classroom too, and everybody
                                  can't speak at once. However, you can talk to yourself, both
                                  in the classroom and opt. Subvocalization can be a very useful
                                  learning technique.
                                       Being a good listener.Talking is only one communication
                                  skill and it's hard to listen when you're talking.But you can
                                  mouth somebody else's words and learn from their mistakes and
                                  successes as you listen.
                                       Analyzing the new language. Being open and receptive to
                                  the new language wilrget you to first base, but you'll stand a
                                  better chance of getting to second (and eventually scoring) if
                                  you understand the rules of the game. Linguists make their
                                  money by analyzing chunks of language to discover the rules.
                                  You don't have to become a professional linguist to learn a lan-
            Is
                                  guage, but it's not a bad idea to become at least an amateur.
                 I   III'

...Cali you become a parroi?           Mimickin . Parrots don't really speak languages, but since
                                  they don't ave any preconceptions of how a language should
                                  sound, they do a reasonably good job of producing human
                                  sounds with limited equipment. You can already produce some
                                  human sounds but your repertoire is limited to the sounds that
                                  exist in English.   Can you forget your English and become a
                                  parrot?
                                       Empathizing.Being a good parrot may help you acquire
                            the sounds of the new language, }rut languages are much more
                            than just new sounds. Languages are also a way of ordering
                            and organizing reality and the reality of a speaker of your new
                            language may be somewhat different from the reality of an
    i                       American. A new language brings with it a cultu-e with its dif-

   ... yawing lift        J
                            /t,
                            ferent life-si.yles and social roles. You may not like all that
                            you find in the new culture, but that is all right. Probably
                            some of the speakers of your new language don't like every-
   ken? (mother tvaPedive.. thing about their own culture, just as you probably don't ad-
                            mire every single aspect of American culture. Part of the thrill
                            of learning a new language is experiencing life from a different
                            perspective. You don't have to sell your soul to the new cul-
                            ture, but a 1,,,illingness to become bicultural will speed up your
                                  efforts to become bilingual.
                                       Being methodical (or developing a method to your mad-
                                  ness. ) Lots of things are going on when you start a new lan-
                                  guage. All the new sounds, words, and grammar rules, come
                                  at you simultaneously and can be overwhelming. There are text
                                  books, reference grammars, dictionaries, phrase books, work




                                                                      Hosted for free on livelingua.com
books and tapes containing things you ought to know. In th,
classroom there are memorization activities, drills, role - plays,
free expression and a lot of people listening and watching what
you do. Obviously you can't cope with everything simultaneous-
ly, and although this language course attempts to present the
language in an orderly fashion and although part of your teach-
er's job is to minimize the confusion, you have to get yourself
together too. Although much of your in-class time will be or-
ganized by the teacher and the material, you are the person
who has the responsibility for organizing your out-of-class
time.

      Understanding and acce tin your limitations. So far we
have pointed out several t ings to consider as you and your
new language confront each other. Learning a new language
also involves a certain amount of self - confrontation. You are
going to experience successes and failures, excitement and fa-
tigue and countless other emotions. You may have to question
your self-image as you compare your progress with your peers
and you may seem to come off unfavorably so let us say again             ...self- confrootation..
that you can only capitalize on your strengths, understand and
try to improve your weaknesses and be willing to accept results
that may not measure up to your aspirations.
        (;coperating and su   ortin .   Much of your schooling up
to this point mayTave een in an atmosphere that was com-
petitive. But in your struggle to learn a new language along
with your peers, all those learning skills that helped you pass
exams or write acceptable term papers won't be especially help-
ful in your new learning situation. You are all in the same
boat together, and although some people may row faster or
ha, der than you can, you'll go farther and longer as a team.
Learning to help and De helped will create an atmosphere in the
classroom that will make learning an enjoyable and unforgettable
communal experience. And remember too that using a language
is a social activity.  It takes one to speak and another to
listen, whether you're learning the language or using it in
fluent conversation.
      Now that we have asked you to think about language learn-
ing and yourself as a language learner, here's another F..agges-
don that will be well worth the time you put into It. Periodical-
ly, issue yourself a "report card" using the topics we have dis-
cussed (we have provided a fcrm on the next page) Beside.

each topic write a few remarks about how you think you're
doing. Do reports at least at the end of the first, third and
fifth week of training. We also recommend that you look over
the communication objectives in Appendix B to get some idea of
what you should be able to do in order to become a functional
speaker of Hassaniya   .




                                                               Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                    Language Learning Self-Evaluation

Name                      Date                   Week#


Memonzing.


Being receptive:


Taking risks:


Being relaxed:


Using the language:


Being a good listener:


Analyzing the language:


Mimicking:



Empathizing:


Being methodical:


',-nderstanding and accepting limitations:


Cooperating and supporting:



                                                   Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                          INTRODUCTION TO
                  THE LANGUAGES OF MAURITANIA


      The national language of Mauritania in Arabic. The Arabic used in
written materials - newspapers, magazines, books etc, is Classical
Arabic (often called Modern Literary Arabic or Modern Standard
Arabic), which is the official language all over the Arab world.
Classical Arabic is also used in formal spoken contexts, for example in
radio and T.V. braodcasts, political speeches and religious functions.
However in informal everyday spoken communication the national dialect
called Hassaniya is used. This is prima-ily a spoken, unwritten form of
Arabic derived from the Classical language, displaying pronunciation,
lexical and structural differences which distinguish it not only from
Classical Arabic, but also from the other spoken dialects of Arabic
found in other parts of the Arabic-speaking world. It is very im-
portant in the early stages of learning Arabic to be aware of the
existence, side by side, of what in effect can be regarded as two
languages: one "classical", literary, long-established written language
used as the medium of secular and religious literature which is rarely
spoken; the other a spoken language used for everyday verbal
communication which is not written.
     The name Hassaniya comes from the name of the Yemeni bedouin
tribes called Beni Hassan who invaded North Africa and settled in what
today is called Mauritania in the fifteenth to seventeenth centuries.
Hassaniya does not appear to be closely related to the dialects of North
Africa, probably because the Yemeni invaders of the south-western
Sahara remained relatively isolated from the people of the northern
Sahara.
    Hassaniya is spoken by the majority of the population of
Mauritania. Some Berber dialects exist in the northern parts of the
country, while in the south and south-west several African languages,
notably Toucouleur, Soninke, Wolof and Bambera are spoken.
     There is considerable linguistic diversity in Hassaniya. There are
four main sub-dialects,      Northern, Southern, Western and Eastern
Hassaniya, and also slight variations between urban, rural and nomadic
peoples. However these local variations within Hassaniya are mainly
limited to vocabulary and pronunciation variants rather than any sig-
nificant structural differences.




                                                                    1


                                                     Hosted for free on livelingua.com
      Education and foreign contacts (notably the French colonial in-
 fluence) have further increased the linguistic diversity within
 liassaniya. Many educated speakers of Hassaniya supplement their
spoken dialect with words and expressions borrowed from French and
Classical Arabic. This tendency is more marked in Nouakchott, the
larger towns and urban areas than in rural areas. Further loan words
have been borrowed from Berber and the various African languages
found in the southern areas of the country. While learning Hassaniya
you must always bear these geographical variations in mind, as well as
the influences from the languages which were current in the area before
the arrival of the Arabs and Islam.

Variant pronunciations of some of the letters of the Arabic alpilabet in
Hassaniya.
     The pronunciation outlined in this Literacy Handbook is based on
Classical Arabic, and would be understood not only in Mauritania, but
all over the Arabic speaking world. However, Hassaniya, like other
national Arabic dialects has its local peculiarities in pronunciation when
compared with the Classical Arabic pronunciation. These variations are
pointed out for your recognition. but not necessarily     Ex reproduction.
There is a prevalent attitude among the intellectual "elite" that these
variations are in some way "inferior."
The main features of Hassaniya are:
                                  we

1.           /ghayn/ becomes              /qa:f/. Thus a Hassaniya speaker
     would pronounce the word          Zi as /luqa/, or the, word              3431-2..)
     as /nuqsul/, or yoz-A-0 as /sqir/. It must be stressed that this
     is only a pronunciation variaticn; in writing the       /ghayn/
     will always appear written as a       L /ghayn/ by educated people.
2.             /qa:f/ is often pronounced as a              /ghayn/. Thus,
     a Hassaniya speaker would pronounce. the word                    as
                        , .                                  rk3
     /ghalam/, or    c-6, AP as imaghra:j/.       It must be st- ssed that
     this is only a pronunciation variation; in writing the         c.,
     /qa:f/ will always appear written as a                  /qa:f/.




                                   *xiv*


                                                       Hosted for free on livelingua.com
3.   In most dialects of Hassaniya                        /qa:f/ is pronounced as
     /g /, as in "good."             Thus, you may hear the word c-1-49                    pro-
     nounced as /galb/, or                   V as /gu:li/ oras /ngid/.
     This is only a pronunciation variation, and in writing, the /qa:f/
     will usually appear written as a                     /qa:f/. You may see the
     /qa:f/ written this way, however:                               It is important to
     note that the two shifts                       /ghayn/ to        3          /qa:f/ and
                  /qa:f/ to                     /ghayn/ never combine to produce
     'the double transition of           f       /ghayn/ to /qa:f/ to /g/          .




4.   Generally,                    /fa:'/ is pronounced as /v/.
                                                             ,/             Thus a Has-
                                                                 O


     saniya speaker would pronounce the word                 Lj.,.).." as /varansa/.
     Again, it must be stressed that this is only a pronunciation varia-
     tion; in writing the                    /fa:'/ will appear written as a
     /fa:'/. or sometimes with the dot below:                          This variation is
     a unique feature of Hassaniya; the sound /v/ does not occur in
     the Arabic alphabet.

5.   Generally, Hassaniya speakers distinguish between                                 /dha:'/
     and    0,0         /da:d/; however, there are rare occasions when you
     will hear                 /dha:'/ used in the place of              (.);'         /da:d/,
     for example,       (15.1/4)1,.;0'   /id-da:lf:n/ will be pronounced as
     dha:li:n/. This is only a pronunciation variation, and in written
     Arabic a    Jo     /dha:'/ will always appear as a   1;   /dha:'/
     and the
     /da:d /.
                    ,             /da:d/ will always appear written as a


This is a feature you must listen out for; the cardinal rule is always to
pronounce words as you hear them pronounced by Mauritanians, taking
their pronunciation as correct in the context of their own dialect.


                                                  *xv*

                                                                     Hosted for free on livelingua.com
6.   Sometimes,       -7--)   /tha:'/ becomes       ..)    /dha:'/.          Thus, a
                                                                                ,
     native speaker of Hassaniya would pronounce the word ;:i,; Le as
     /dhama:niya/, or j t; as /dha:ni/.           Remember, this is a
     feature of the spoken language, and in written Arabic, the /tha:'/
                                ,
     is always written as ' /tha:'/.
7.   Generally, the                 /ji:m/ becomes /j/ in Hassaniya, similiar
     to the French pronunciation of 'j' as in "je".



 You may well hear all or only some of these shifts and variations de-
 pending on where you are living in the country. In Nouakchott and
 the larger towns you may hear all of them since the cities are the
 meeting places, and people using different local dialects live side by
 side. To most Mauritanians these shifts are mutually intelligible, but
 for a first time learner of Hassaniya they may appear a little daunting
 at first. However, keep your ears open and imitate what you hear
 used around you by native speakers and gradually these variations will
 fit into place. The important thing to always bear in mind is that they
 are all pronunciation variations; written Arabic will always follow the
 spelling of the word in Classical Arabic.




                                     *xvi*          Iv
                                                          Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                               INTRODUCTION TO
            THE COMMUNICATION AND CULTURE HANDBOOK:

                        Parts of a Typical Lesson

     The Communication and Culture Handbook is a set of lessons that
concentrates on what to say and do in a variety of situations. These
situations are arranged in a sequence of 25 situations. Although it is
best to study them one after the other, it is possible to skip a lesson
or jump around in the book. It would be a good idea to cover all the
situations during the training program. The material has been designed
so that every student will have an opportunity to learn to say and do
something in every situation.
    You will notice that some of the lessons are divided into Basic
Material and Additional Material. Some students will learn faster than
others, and so they will be able to do additional work by learning the
Additional Material as well. The important thing to remember is that
the Basic Material is required and the Additional or Supplementary
Material is advised.
     Although each lesson is a little different from all the others. there
are usually six parts to each lesson. They are:
                          1.     Objective
                          2.     Basic Material
                          3.     Notes on basic material
                          4.     Activities
                          5.     Suggestions for Use
                          6.     Additional Material
     Teacher and students should be aware that not all the material has
been translated into Arabic. The second and third pages of most les-
sons contain the Arabic material as well as pertinent notes and sug-
gestions.   Since the students have activities and suggestions written in
their lessons, have the students suggest ways a lesson can be taught.
or -role-played.




                                                           Hosted for free on livelingua.com
Parts of a lesson:
1.         Objective. This is a statement of what you the learner is ex-
     pected to learn. It should answer the question "What new thing
     can I do as a result of learning this lesson?" Sometimes the title
     of the lessons will clearly indicate what the objective is, but some-
     times the title is inadequate, and reading the objective will be
     helpful. One thing that you should always ask yourself is "When
     this lesson is done, can I actually do what the objective says I can
     do." For a list of over-all objectives, see Appendix B.

2.        Basic Material and Translation. You will notice that the basic
     material is presented in English translation on the first, of
     left-hand page. The Arabic script version of the Basic Material
     (plus appropriate notes to the teacher) is available on the facing
     right-hand, or second page. The same material is available in
     Arabic script on the third page as well, opposite the transliterated
     version (with appropriate notes to the student) on the fourth
     page. Take the time now to thumb through a sample lesson of The
     Communication and Culture Handbook to observe this lay-out.

          The Basic Material is the heart of the lesson. It may be pre-
     sented in several ways. Sometimes it may be a dialogue; sometimes
     it may be a paragraph; sometimes it may be only key words and
     phrases. The Teacher's Handbook describes various techniques
     that you can use for teaching dialogues and other ways in which
     the Basic Material has been presented.
          For many of the lessons your job will be to memorize the
     words, phrases and sentences of the Basic Material. Memorization
     will require a certain amount rif repetition -- saying things over
     and over. This is not always very fun or interesting, but it is
     important, although there can be too much repetition too. Some of
     the material will require you to "play" with the language. Try to
     create new sentences based on words and sentence patterns you
     already know. Try to vary the phrases you have memorized, al-
     though many times you will make wrong guesses. You should not
     be discouraged from attempts to be creative with the language.
     Making mistakes is a very important part of language learning.

3.        Notes on Basic Material. The purpose of these notes in the                     .
     students' handbook is to explain given vocabulary items or new
     words which are contained in the dialogue or narrative material.
     Sometimes synonyms of the word are given.       Read both the English
     translation on the first page of the lesson and the English Notes
     below the transliteration in order to understand what you are
     being asked to repeat and memorize.




                                                ib
                                                     Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                                                                          1




4.        Activities. The activities related to the techniques in Part II
     of The Teacher's Handbook. They suggest ways in which to teach
     or learn the Basic Material, such as "acting out" or "role playing"
     a dialogue. Sometimes, the activities suggest ways to enrich the
     lesson with an excursion or a class-organized meal, for example.
     Try Lo suggest you own activities.

5.        Suggestions for Use. These suggestions are to help the stu-
     dents realize that competency at memorization in the classroom is
     no substitute for actual communication with speakers of Arabic.
     Sometimes the suggestions can be considered as homework assign-
     ments to be reported on the next day. Sometimes they will re-
     quire class time for you to organize the assignment. Get your
     teacher to help you make out shopping lists, or conduct interviews
     where necessary.

6.        Additional Material.   As we have said, the Additional Material
     is not required, though many students will want to learn all of it.
     You should go over the new words and phrases in class, to learn
     the correct pronunciation. Use the Additional Material for dic-
     tations or for writing practice where appropriate. Do not require
     that your students memorize the lists which appear in some of t1.3
     Additional Material, but make sure that you hear the correct
     pronunciation and have a chance to practice saying it.




                                             2u
                                                      Hosted for free on livelingua.com
"Ir. the Na." t of God. Most Gracious, Moe: Merciful"




                                     2, 1
                                                        Hosted for free on livelingua.com
     Hosted for free on livelingua.com
22
                                    GREETINGS

                                    Lesson One




Objectives.    1.      At the end of this lesson, you should be able to
                       greet men and women using the appropriate forms,
                       and you should be able to respond to several com-
                       mon greetings yourself.


Translation    Ahmed:      Hello!
of Dialogue:
               John:       Hello:
               Ahmed:      How are you?
               John:       Fine, thanks

Activities:    1.   Memorize the dialogue.
               .1
                       Practice the dialogue with your teacher or with
                       another student, taking turns with the two roles.
               3.   Pay attention to your teacher's pronunciation of the
                    dialogue. Try to imitate the correct pronunciation
                    as best you can.

Suggestions    1.   Use this greeting with people in shops that you en-
for Use-            ter, offices you have business in. and whenever you
                    see someone for the first time in the day.
               9    If you get- a response different from the ones you
                    have learned. make a note of it and learn what it
                    means.   Remember that in basic greeting situations,
                    speakers of Arabic often use several different ways
                    of asking the same question -- "How are you?", and
                    many ways of saying -well- or "fine".
               3.   Copy the Arabic dialogue in a notebook and have
                    your teacher look it over.




                                      *2*

                                                 ) ,)
                                                 4. c.1
                                                      Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON ONE
                        Jay` L.y) ;),




                   0
             *3*   4z
                         Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                       LESSON ONE
<y)



             c3- yulo'




      Ly-)   )     Si



                                         )4)




             *4*
                         Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON ONE                                                             GREETINGS




BASIC MATERIAL:     Dialogue for Memorization.
          /ahmad/         /is-sala:mu calay-kum/
          /ju:n/          /ucalay-kum is-sala:m/
          /ahmad/         /ya:k la ba:s?/
          /ju:n/          /la ba:s il-huindu li-lla:h/



 Notes on the Dialogue:
 1.    Greetings in the Arab world tend to be lengthier than in the
       West.   Be prepared to shake hands frequently - -ever with
       every person in a room or office. Hands are shaken for
       longer, and often are held for a few moments while talking.
       Failure to greet people properly (i.e. the American tendency
       to want to get "right down to business") may be considered
       rather abrupt. (See note on women shaking hands in this
       lesson.)
 2      /is-sala:mu calay-kum/ literally means "the peace upon you",
      - and is said by the person arriving or entering.
 3     /ya:k la ba:s/ is a question which literally means "is there no
       harm?"
 4.    The response /la ba:s/ means "no harm".
 5.    /il-hamdu li-lla:h/ literally means "the praise to God", and is
       frequently used where we would say "thank goodness".




                                       *5*
                                                   0 $' ,
                                                   4. '3


                                                            Hosted for free on livelingua.com
GREETINGS                                                          LESSON ONE




Objective:     After learning this dialogue, you should be able to use
               alternative greetings.

Translation    Fatima:   Hello!
of bialogue:
               Jane:     Hello.
               Fatima:   How are you?
               Jane:     Fine, thanks.
               Fatima:   (Fine), thanks.

Activities:    1.   Memorize the dialogue and use it in practice with
                    members of your class.


Suggestions    1.   Copy the Arabic dialogue in a notebook and have
for Use:            your teacher look it over.


 Cultural Note:
 Women may find a slightly different form of greetings etiquette than
 men. Older men, for example, may not readily shake hands with
 women, and women are advised not to force the situation. Observe
 the exchange of greetings between women when you have the oppor-
 tunity.




                                  *6*
                                             C) ,1
                                             4.. .
                                                Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON ONE




               YLL-Ai4 1




                                                            ,,I., I,
                   C                    .nJ


             0,1 ',4         _f.1L4 I     ;


                                 L




                       *7*           23

                                              Hosted for free on livelingua.com
j; )" f1)
     (.)1   1
                                      LESSON ONE




                *8*



                            Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                      2L1
LESSON ONE                                                         GREET INGS




BASIC MATERIAL: Dialogue for Memorization      .



         /fa : timatu/       /is- sala :mu calay-kum/
         /ja yn/             /ucalay-kum is- sala :m/
         /fa : timatu/       /ya : k il-khayr?/
         /jayn/              /illa-l-khayr il-hamdu li-lla : h/
         /f a : timatu/      /il-hamdu li-lla : h/



 Notes on the Dialogue :
 1.   /y : ak il-khayr/ means "is there good?"
 2.   the response /illa-l-khayr/ means "nothing but the good"                  .



 3.   Note the use of /il-hamdu li-lla :h/ alone as a reinforcement of
      the praise to God.




                                  *9*



                                 3(1                    Hosted for free on livelingua.com
 GREETINGS                                                               LESSON ONE




  Cultural Note:
  You will hear a wide range of alternatives for greetings, courtesy
  phrases and other everyday vocabulary. These tend to vary from
  area to area within the country and according to the educational
  level of speakers. It can be very frustrating when learning a new
  language to hear several versions of something you have just
  learned, but Arabic, like English, is an extremely rich and varied
  language, and as a first-time learner you must make the effort
  to memorize several words and phrases with approximately the same
  meaning which can be used interchangeably. Keep your ears open
  and whenever you hear a new word or phrase, try to write it down
  and ask your teacher or a Mauritanian friend what it means.




SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL:            Standard Arabic greetings. (useful for
dealing with expatriate Arabs).
     Good morning!       /saba:h il-khayr/
     (greeting)
     Good morning.       /saba :h in-nu:r/
     (response)
(Sometimes you will hear the following alternative
response to the above greeting.)
     Good morning.        ,c
                               alay-na wa calay-kum/
     (response)

     Good evening!       ,masa: il-khayr/
     (greeting)
     Good evening.       /masa: il-khayr/
     (response)
(Sometimes you will hear the same alternative
response to the above greeting.)
    Good evening.        /calay-na wa calay-kum/
    (response)                                                       -

                                     *10*



                                                       Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON ONE                                                     GREETINGS




Su  estions   1.   Practice the alternative greetings for "Good morning"
or Use:            and "good evening". Listen for these phrases in
                   Arabic conversations you will hear around you in
                   taxis, markets, offices, etc. Try to vary your own
                   greetings and responses and to use the appropriate
                   forms for different tunes of the day.
              2.   Use these examples for writing practice.          Get your
                   teacher to look over yourefforts.




                                          32
                                                    Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                       CONTINUING A CONVERSATION:
                              Personal Information
                                  Lesson Two




Objectives:    1.      At the end of this lesson, you should be able to
                       ask how someone is using several common forms.
                       You should also be able to ask what someone's name
                       is and respond to similar personal information ques-
                       tions about yourself.

Translation    Fatimatu:         What's new?
of Dialogue:
               Jane:             Nothing but good (news).
               Fatimatu:         What's your name?
               Jane:             My name's Jane.     And what's your name?
               Fatimatu:         My name's Fatimatu.

Activities:    1.      Memorize the dialogue.
               2.      Practice the dialogue with a classmate or your teach-
                       er.
               3.      Copy the Arabic dialogue in a notebook and have
                       your teacher look it over.

Suggestions    1.      Try to learn the names of people you come into
for Use:               daily contact with. Make a list of the names you
                       learn and bring them to class and compare notes
                       with your classmates. Try to learn the correct pro-
                       nunciations.




                                      *12*




                                                33     Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON TWO




                                c
                                       51L
                                      ..          L.1-A"
                                                           1
                                                                                      4,


                            ._.5-w         cs / Ii2 si,                                 0-9




c        .
    (..-000
    .         -   Y\TA-&-ij J




                                           I.,             I                      _    .
                                                                                  gi_ril I"




                                    *13*

                                                 34
                                                               Hosted for free on livelingua.com
00)1%                                          LESSON TWO




        (   A AA   (5 1 Lb

                             .   0




                   *14*


                             35
                                     Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSGN TWO                                    CONTINUING A CONVERSATION




BASIC MATERIAL:      Dialogue for Memorization.
      /fa:timatu/         /ash ta : ri?/
      /jayn/              /ma ta : ri shay/
      /fa: timatu/        /shinhu ism-ik?/
      /jayn/              /ism-i jayn.     wa shinhu ism-ik inti?/
      /fa:timatu/         /ism-i fa: timatu/


 Notes on the Dialogue:
 1.     /ash t a:ri?/ means "what new?"         Note the absence of the
        verb "is" where it would be used in English.
        /shinhu ism-ik?/ literally means "what name your?" There is
        no verb "to be" in Arabic. The suffix /ik/ is a possessive
        pronoun. For further explanation see "Possessive Pronouns"
        in the Grammar Handbook.
       /inti/ is the feminine pronoun "you" (singular). /inta/ is the
       masculine pronoun "you" (sing.) See Grammar Handbook les-
       son on personal pronouns for further reference.




                                   *15*




                                                   36
                                                              Hosted for free on livelingua.com
     CONTINUINC: A CONVERSATION                           LESSON TWO




     A "):::ONA- MATER:AL   Wr


         1...r2S




                                            .-5L5   }Lf
                                                      k    3-47




                    a


                                 1




"-




                                     37 Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON TWO                                 CONTINUING A CONVERSATION




  Notes on the Additional Material.
  Among the useful words and phrases in the list you will find both
  Hassaniya expressions (those which are specific to Mauritanian
  speakers) and Standard equivalents (those which are understood
  over a wide area in the Arabic-speaking .world.) Both expressions
  are readily understood by Mauritanians.


Suggestions    I.     Practice saving these expressions and learn as many
for Use               of them as you can. It can be helpful to make
                      index cards for each new word or expression.
                      Write the English meaning and the transliteration on
                      one side, and write the Arabic on the other. Learn
                      them well enough to erase the transliteration, and
                      rely only on the Arabic.



 Cultural Note:     Names in Mauritania
 In   traditional Arab societies, the family name (the "last name") is
 transmitted by the father, just as it is in the West, but the "last
 name" in this case is the given of the father, so that it changes
 from   generation to generation. For example, Brahim has two
 children, Mohammed and Khadijatu. They are called Mohammed wul
 Brahim ("mohammed the son of Brahim") and Khadijatu mint Brahim
 ("Khadijatu the daughter of Brahim")    If Brahim's father was
                                            .



 called Bashir, Mohammed's geneology could be traced through his
 name: Mohammed wul Brahim wul Bashir ... etc. If Brahim had
 made the pilgrimage to Mecca, he would be given the name "Hajj"
 (pilgrim):   El Hajj Brahim wul Bashir.




                                   *17*



                      .r.                  38       Hosted for free on livelingua.com
    LESSON TWO
                                                                                           NUMBERS




    BASIC MATERIAL:         Cardinal numbers 1-10.
                                                                               Arabic
            transliteration                        Arabic                      Numeral

    0       /sift /, /saro/      ...,....".&A)      ...)..A..).2




    1       /wa:hid/


2           /ithnavn/                                                              C



3           /thala : tha/


4           iarbaca/


5           /khamsa/


6           sitta/


,           sabaca/


8          /thama:niyal


9          /tisaca/


10         /Cashra/


                                                 *18*



                                                                   39 Hosted for free on livelingua.com
NUMBERS
                                                                        LESSON TWO




Ac:tivity:     1.   Read the sign identifying the business establishment
                    which you see below. Observe the use of both
                    Western & Arabic numerals.
              2     Write out the name of the establishment and other
                    information in Arabic.



                       BP                      222            Y            .

                       Tel                   20-6C
                                 Nouakchott


 Cultural Note on numbers             "Arabic Numerals"
 The cipher. the so-called Arabic numerals, and the decimal system
 of notation were all invented by the Indians, but it was the Arabs
 who handed them on to Europe. thus making   possible
 day arithmetic as we know it, but also far-reachingnot only every-
 developments which the f;reeks. for all their original mathematical
                                                         genius and
 intellectual power,, had not been able to embark upon without   the
 cipher and the Arabic numerals.
The Arabic numerals which you see here are written in the form
which is widely used in other parts
                                          of the Arab world.      In
Mauritania. auto license plates and most signs   utilize the Western
system: however you will
they are useful to learn. seeNote
                                them used for certain purposes and
                                    the
betwet n the Arabic and English symbols similarities and differences
                                                     .




                                             ?PPP-




                                       4
                                  5


                             1




                                           *19*


                                                         40
                                                                  Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                           BASIC PERSONAL INFORMATION

                                       Lesson Th ;ee




Objective:         1.      At the end of this lesson, you should be ably. to
                           ask where someone is from. and to respond to
                           similar inquiry about yourself You should also be
                                                             .
                           able   to   give the Arabic equivalents for common
                           place names.

Translation        Mike:               Hello.
of Dialoue:
       __
                   Mohammed:           Hello
                                       How are you today?
               Mike                    Fine,, thanks.
               Mohammed.               Say . where are you from?
               Mike:                   I'm from         A

               Mohammed.               From where in             A

               Mike.                   From         B


Activities     1        Practice the conversation, filling in                   the blanks
                        with appropriate place names.
               .1
                        Learn the pronunciation of these place names as
                        well as others which you feel will be important.
              J.        Ask people m your class or training program where
                        they come from. Report back to the class.

Suggestions   1.        Because many people in a capital city like Nouakchott
for Use:                have come from ccner places, it can be interesting to
                        find out where they are from. An informal survey
                        would probably produce surprising results.
              .1
                        Use the Arabic dialogue as writing praaice.                      Write
                        it out until you can produce consistent copies of
                        either the model in the book, or your teacher's
                        handwriting.

                                          x20*




                                                        41
                                                                 Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON THREE                                      (.9.) a 0.0;31


                                                       1




                        L---)                                                  .):4-e
          (
              CL./3 1                             L >)                         ..L,
          .
                                `3) 'ka4 t
      (                     ,                 A




                                          A            L                        /
                                                                              3,...,




                                   *21*           42
                                                           Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                                      LESSON THREE




            1



                                   () L )
            ,..,

        c0)        ''-c'   k


c

                      A                       I




    e   A


                               r
                                             ..f



                                                  B




                     *22*
                                    43
                                         Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON THREE                                BASIC PERSONAL INFORMATION




BASIC MATERIAL:      Conversation for Practice.
      imi:k/              /ahlan/
      /muhammad/          /ahlan wa sahlan    .       sh-ha: 1-ak il-yawm?/
      /mi:k/              /la bass il-hamdu li-llah. wa inta?/
      /muhammad/          /il-hamdu li-lla :h. gutlak, inta min minayn?/
      /mi:k/              /ana min                A              /
      /muhammad/          /min minayn vi                     A                 ?/
      /mi:k/              /min                    B                   /

                    A                                            B
      America             /amri:ka/                   Seattle             /si:atil/
      France              /varansa/                   Paris               /ba:ri:s/
      Mauritania          /muri:ta:ni:ya/             Nouakchott          /nu:a:kshu:t/
      Senegal             /sanaga :1/                 Dakar               /daka:r/
      Morocco             /il-maghrib/                Rabat               /ir-riba:_tf


 Notes on the Dialogue:
 1.    /il-yawm/ lit. means "the day", but it is used to mean
       "today".
 2.    /gutlak/ means "Say..." or "Tell me..." or "By the way..."
 3.    /ana min.. ./ literally means "I-from", and is another example of
       the absence in Arabic of the verb "be" where it would be used hi
       English.




                                     *23*
                                                  44
                                                                 Hosted for free on livelingua.com
BASIC PERSONAL INFORMATION                                 LESSON THREE




SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL:

The names of the major cities on this map are written in Arabic. Iden-
tify the major cities and towns and then use them in answers to the ques-
tions of your classmates.




                                  *24*


                                              45 Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON THREE                                                                           BASIC PERSONAL INFORMATION




SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL:

Compare this English map with the Arabic map adjacent.          Locate
Mauritania in respect to other northwestern African countries. Learn
the names of the neighboring countries and other important features of
Northwest Africa.

            n on.. Racoon Boundary                           POPULATE PLACES                   Void
                                                                                                                                .c.
                                                                                                                              Me! 5.e
                      low/wane Bounione                                                         A Ureter
                                                              ow 0,000                          Open
                      Carcio BouncleT                       0 a.000 to 8.000
                                                                                                                            ,A1 R iCA
              0 Natanal Csonal                                ...now 4,000
             Nome Achnourtranya CAHN,

                      Rood or Track               Iktes 0            75          150
                                          Ketometsrs 0          75                                             Barra
             '5k Airport                                               150
                                                                                                               Atlantic
                                                                                                               Orono
                      RNIt011d




                                                                                                                                          ALGERIA

                     North
                     Atlantsc
                     Ocean
                                                                                           Mcgram
                                                  SPANISH
                                                  SAHARA
                                                                                                    TIRISZEMMOOR

                                                                                                                                             MALI

                                                                          Touirate

                                                                 F Oa.




                                                                                                                                   I
                     NtAt VER                                         Ouadane
                                                                                       ADRAR
             bou
                          VIII/                                           Chinquetti
                                      INCHIRI                   74
             Todra                      At ;mut                                            alle Mamas
               Cada
               TrIMI if
                                                                                            TAGANT
                                                                                                                                      I
                                            TRARZA               $.4 now,.
                                                                                                           Trcrtit/           HODH
                                  NOUAKCHOTT                                                                                  ORIENTAL
                                       Brrolmd                   VII Moudrena
                                                        BRAKNA         Nik.mcse:te,,.4.
                           A4a0erCa
                                                      AIp            ,:_.;10-TT
                                                                             ---
                                                              ,,A.,...,: AssABA
                                                                                    6.,ils
                                                                                  Calittgla
                                                                                             Tamcnetet


                                                    Boahi

             Saint
                             is       Senegal R                                    4tf f NOOK. )----/
                                                                     .1100,0 1
             Louts
                                                            .GOR.,...           -7      kOCCIDENTAL
                                                               GoLtaTieds,"                                t

                                                                 iviiholmAKA
                      .: . :.:                                                II       :

                                  .   SENEGAL                             St; .Dbv

                                                                                                               .,   (MALI




                                                                       *25*

                                                                                                                    46
                                                                                                                                  Hosted for free on livelingua.com
NUMBERS 11-20                                                      LESSON THREE




ADDITIONAL MATERIAL:



 Note on high numbers:
 Since there are 45 ougiya to the U.S. dollar you will have to get
 use to dealing with much higher figures when dealing with the cost
 of things. A relatively small shopping list will cost you several
 hundred, if not a thousand ougiya Concentrate on learning to use
 and understand high numbers quickly. The numbers 11-19 are
 given here, 20-100, 100-1000, and 1000-1,000,000 are given in Ad-
 ditional sections in Lessons Four, Five, and Seven. If you have
 immediate use of all the numbers refer forward to these Additional
 sections in class or on your own.


    11                   /ihdaesh/

    12                   /ithnacsh/

    13                   /thalatacsh/

    14                   /arbactacsh/

    15                   /khamstacsh/
                                                                   ..3
                                                        r,
    16                   /sittacsh/
                                                 .           ...
    17                   /sabacatacsh/           cr.)    0_1_17...j. .-   1




    18                   /ithmantacsh/                                    k




    19                   /itisactacsh/

    20                   /cishri:n/


                                     *26*
                                               47
                                                     Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON THREE
                                                            NUMBERS 11-20




Activities:    1.   Memorize the numbers 11-20
              2.    Play a "numbers game" with your teacher or a class-
                    mate.     You give the "odd" numbers, your teacher
                    or classmate the "even" numbers
              3.    Get your teacher        to write out   the numbers in
                    Arabic.    Copy them into your copybook. You will
                    not have many occasions to write out numbers in
                    words, but it is good practice. Notice the similar-
                    ities with the numbers 1-10.
              4.    Write out the numbers 1-20 in Arabic, figures; get
                    used to recognizing them.



              Look at this illustration showing the numbers 1, 5, 10
              and 20 as used on the four basic coins of the Mauritan-
              ian monetary system.        Compare your pocket change with
              thes( in the photograph and read the Arabic on them.




                                  4:27*

                                                48
                                                           Hosted for free on livelingua.com
              AGE. MARITAL STATUS & FAMILY INFORMATION

                                   Lesson Four




Objectives       1.   At the end of this lesson. you should be able to
                      ask and respond to questions regarding your age
                      and marital status, and to ask about children in a
                      family   .




                      You should be able to recognize prices when you
                      hear them in shopping situations.

Translation      Susan:      Are you married?
of Dialogue:     Khadija:    Yes. I am. Are you?
                 Susan:      No. I'm not married.
                 Khadija:    Where is your family?
                 Susan:      My family is in America.
                 Khadija:    How many brothers and sisters do you have?
                 Sasan:      I have four.

Activities.      1    Memorize the dialogue.
                 _    Practice the dialogue in pairs.         varying the re-
                      sponses as you so choose.

Suggestions.     1    Try to extend your conversation exchanges with
for Use               people you meet by asking questions such as these.
                      Find out the answers to these questions about per-
                      sons on your training or Peace Corps office staff.
                      Report back to the class.       Don't be surprised if
                      people are vague about their ages. Find out other
                      words used to mean -married". You may have to
                      learn to "justify" it if you are single.
                 2.   Use the Arabic dialogue as writing practice. Write
                      it    out as many times as you need in order to be
                      able to produce consistent copies of either the
                      model in the book. or your teacher's handwriting.


                                       *28*




                                                  49
                                                   Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON FOUR
                                ") Q)))2 4)-"

              c
                                          3`),A.ea




                     J1'




                   ja.



       _ye




                  *29*
                           50
                                 Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                                                                       LESSON FOUR




                                     C
                                             k:-..:=-.0           c-----. .1                    3 ' ))-

                                 .   c_.......)
                                                  >          M9'.




                                                                                              c..).   ./..---,'")



                                 (                                  .     .
                                                                   (.-."`..'




                                             (5


L
    ,._.- 5.P..>
           .

                   L.., ..,4). .9k   (:)..            .A.k.




                                      2...a.) i           L...5     ..,..;S




                                             *30*


                                                                        51
                                                                               Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON FOUR                                            AGE, MARITAL STATUS
                                                       & FAMILY INFORMATION



BASIC MATERIAL:        Dialogue for Memorization.
      /su:za:n/             /inti mitkhayyima?/
      /khadi: ja/           /ahi:h wa inti?/
      /su:zan/              /abda ma:ni mitkhayyima./
      /khadi:ja/            /minayn usrat-ik?/
      /su:za:n/             /usrat-i vi amri:ka/
      /khadi: ja/           /kam cand-ik min it -akhu:t wa it -akhwa:t?/
      /su:za:n/             /candi arba c a/



 Notes on the Dialogue:
 1.     A married man would be /mitkhayyim /, which means literally
        "sharing a tent". Adjectives describing people reflect the
        gender of the person described. Therefore, masculine and fem-
        inine adjectives will be different. See Gender (of Adjectives)
        in the Grammar Handbook.
 2.     /ahi:h/, "yes," and /abda/, "no", are words peculiar to Has-
        saniya, but Volunteers in other parts of the country may
        hear other words used.
 3.     /ma:ni/ means "I am not".         See the section on Negatives in
        the Grammar Handbook.
 4.     /cand-ik/ literally means "near you". See the Grammar
        Handbook for further information about this important
        structure in the section on "Have/Have Got."
 5.     /usrat-ik/ means "family-your".        Other words you may hear
        are / a:9.1a/ and /ahl/.      See Grammar Handbook lesson note
        on suffix pronouns.
 6.     /kam/ means "how many" or "how much" (except with prices,
        for which /ba:sh/ is used.)
 7.     /il-akhu:t/ means "brother -s" , /il -akhaw : t/ "sisters".



                                      *31*
                                                  52
                                                               Hosted for free on livelingua.com
DAYS OF THE WEEK                                                  LESSON FOUR




ADDITIONAL MATERIAL:           Days of the Week.
The names of most of the days of the week are closely allied to the num-
bers one through six:
       Sunday            /yawm it -had/                                       k           - )-
                                                                                      1



       Monday            /yawm il-ithnayn/                       b-t..4-3' ()-),

       Tuesday           /yawm ith-thala:tha/
                                                                                          C'
       Wednesday          /yawm il-arbaca/


       Thursday           /yawm il- kjiami: s;


       Friday             /yawm il-jumaca/


       Saturday           /yawm is-sibt/                                  .       k         y....




  Notes on days of the week:
  1.     The Arabic names for the first five days of the week, Sunday
         through Thursday, are derived from the same words as the
         numbers one   five; in fact, the words for Monday, Tuesday
         and Wednesday are exactly like the numbers 2,3 and 4. The
         words for Sunday and Thursday are only slightly different
         from the numbers one and four.
  2,     /yawm/ means "day" - so the names of the days of the week
         are simply 'day the one', 'day the two' etc.



                                    *32*

                                                      Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                                 53
LESSON FOUR                                              NUMBERS 20-100




ADDITIONAL MATERIAL:       Cardinal numbers 20-100.
     20                       /Cishri:n/

     30                       /thla:thi:n/

     40                       /art)aci:n/

     50                       /khamsi:n/

     60                       /sitti:n/

     70                       ,sabC.1:n/

     80                       /thma:ni:n,

     90                       /tisci:n/

     100                      /mi: ya/



Mixed numbers
In Arabic the 'unit' comes before the 'ten'. Thus 21 literally translated
is "one and twenty", etc.
     21                       /wa:hid u cishri:n/   (:..., .......     , ...,%p l) ..

     22                       /ithnayn u cishri:n/                          L5,...,;1


     33                       /thla:tha u cishri:n/ (:)...L...c.           4.; >4;




                                  *33*
                                             54
                                                        Hosted for free on livelingua.com
NUMBERS 20-100                                                          LESSON FOUR




Activities:       1.   Memorize the numbers 20-100.
                  2.   Play a 'mixed numbers game' with your teacher and
                       classmates.
                  3.   Get your teacher to show you hotir to write some mix-
                       ed numbers out in Arabic script.                 Use his or her
                       models   for writing practice in your notebooks.
                  4.   Write mixed numbers out in Arabic figures.
                  5.   Read these numbers out in Arabic, and then write
                       them out in both Arabi:: figures and letters.

                            42, 100, 21, 31, 80, 79, 99,
                            28, 33 19, 89, 91, 15, 8, 19,
                            75, 4L, 56, 67, 73, 79, 84, 45, 6

ADDITIONAL USEFUL VOCABULARY:
How do you say that              /ki:v tgu:1 ha:dha
 in Hassaniya?                       bil-hassaniyya?/
a little                         /shway/
What does that mean?             /ash macana ha:dha?/
Slowly.                          /bi-shu:r/
Its too expensive.               /ha : dila wa : cir/

Lower the price                  /na:gis shway/
  a little.

Yes! (literally                  /walla:hi/
 "by God!")

enough                           /ka:vi/                                              Ld



                                      *34*


                                                        55 Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON FOUR




ADDITIONAL MATERIAL:        Additional family vocabulary.
   mother              /umm/                              "1
                                                          r
   father              /ab/

   son                 /walad/                        ,J,
   sons                /ula : d/               ..) ,9 , 1


                                                      _
   daughter            /mint/                  .....--...A....




   daughters           /amna:t/             ,:..L.,,, t


   brother             /akh/


   brothers            /akhwat/                  if       .1;    I




   sister              /ukht/                   ,..1.-1, I


   sisters             /akhu:t/              c:i 9-9 I


   husband             /zawj/


   wife                /zawja/



                                   *35*


                       ;A                 56
                                                                     Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                SHOPPING:      INQUIRING ABOUT AVAILABILITY
                                      Lesson Five




 Objective:          At the end of this lesson you should be able to ask for
                     something which you cannot see in a market or shop.
                     You will be able to ask the price of. something and use
                     the appropriate polite formulae for terminating a con-
                     versation.

 Translation     Customer:           Hello.
 of Dialogue:    Shopkeeper:         Hello.
                 Customer:           Do you have any rice today?
                 Shopkeeper:         Yes, of course.
                 Customer:           How much is a kilo?
                 Shopkeeper:         It's 13 ougiya.
                 Customer:           O.K. Give me a kilo please.
                 Shopkeeper:         Here you are.
                 Customer:           Thank you. Goodbye.
                 Shopkeeper:         Goodbye.

Activities:      1.     Practice saying the lines of the dialogue with
                                                                   a class-
                        mate, a friend, or your teacher. Switch roles
                        try to memorize one part.                     and
                2.      Set up a table or window as a shop stall. Choose
                        common items you might find in a Mauritanian shop
                        and conduct a role-play shopping situation.
Suggestions     1.      Go on a "scavenger hunt" through the central souk.
for Use:                Look closely at the stalls in which common house-
                        hold items are sold. Make a list of the most com-
                        mon items you see.      Compare notes with classmates
                        and learn the Arabic names for the most interest-
                        ing items.
                2.      Befriend a shopkeeper or merchant in your neighbor-
                        hood. Should you be invited to sit for awhile or to
                        drink tea, take advantage of the opportunity to lis-
                        ten to typical exhanges between the shopkeeper and
                        customers.

                                       *36*




                                                 57
                                                       Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON FIVE
              0....-'l1




                   Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON FIVE               L),...1.14 c       (),          .1') t




                                               (s   f   L-.4-74-




                                             (1 i k----1-1-'
                                                              L;




              *38*



                     59   Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON FIVE                                                 SHOPPING:
                                          INQUIRING ABOUT AVAILABILITY



BASIC MATERIAL:      Dialogue for memorization.
      /mishta:ri/         /is-sala:mu calay-kum/
      /ta:jir/            /ucalay-kum is-sala:m/
      /mishta:ri/         /kha:lig ma:ru il-yawm?/
      /ta: jir/           /kha:lig bacad/
      /mishta:ri/         /ba:s;_ il-ki:lu?/
      /ta:jir/            /thalatacsh u: gi: ya /
      /mishta:ri/         /aywa ila:h ki:lu/
      /ta : jir/          /ha:k/
      /mishta:ri/         /shukran. waddacna-k il-mula:na/
      /ta:jir/            /waddacna-k il-mula:na/



 Notes on the Dialogue:
 1.     /kha:lig/ is a common word which means "there is/is there?"
        (masc.) and is used in making statements or asking questions
        about availability or existence. /kha:Igal is the feminine
        form and /kha:lgi:n/ is the plural.
 2.     /ma:ru/ is an African-derived word for "rice".
 3.     /kha:lig bacacy is an expression which means "Of course
        there is." /b ad/ is also used after other words to reinforce
        the "of course' nature of the phrase. For e2cample if you ask
        /atay zayn/? the answer may be /zayn ba ad/ - "of course
        it's good." The final /d/ is often silent.
 4.     /ba:sh/ means "how much" in expressions of quantity or
        money.   /il-ki:lu/ refers to a kilogram, or 2.2 English
        pounds.    Refer to Grammar Handbook on Definite Articles.
 5.     /ila:h/ is an expression which means "give ine." Refer to
        Grammar Handbook lesson on Imperatives for further informa-
        tion.
6,      /ha:k/ means "here you are". For a female: /ha:ki/.


                                   *39*

                                               6()
                                                       Hosted for free on livelingua.com
 SHOPPING:
                                                                               LESSON FIVE
 NUMBERS 100-1000




 ADDITIONAL MATERIAL:       Cardinal numbers 100-1000
      100                 /miya/                                               alk,
      200                 /mi : tayn/
                                                                       (51-;-'-'

     300                 /ithlatmiya/                              :I...x:1;k

     400                 /arbacmiya/                           4.-t....e.)           k


     500                 /akhamsmiya/                      ...;%,.4.,..A...........j" k


                                                                               .4
     600                 /sittmiya/

     700                 /isbacmiya/
                                                                 _         .


     800                 /ithmanmiya/                             ;.,_.;-.; k
     900                 /itsacmiya/

     1000                /alv/


Mixed numbers:
In Arabic the 'hundred' comes first, followed by the 'unit', and then the
'ten'. Thus 121 literally translated is: "two hundred and one and                            .
twenty".
            525                  /akhamsmiya u khamsa u cishn:n/

            734                  /isbacmiya u arbca u thla : thi :IV

            1979              /alv u tsacmiya u tisaca u sabci:n/


                                     *40*


                                                    61 Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON FIVE                                                                                  SHOPPING:
                                                                                        NUMBERS 100-1000




Activities:       1.          Learn to use and recognize as many of the high
                              thousands as you need for your everyday needs.
                 2.           Play 'numbers games' with your teacher and class-
                              mates.
                 3.           Write some numbers out in Arabic figures and words.
                 4.           Read these numbers out in Arabic, and then write
                              them out in your copybook.
                                          550, 89n, 1500, 1750, 1979, 423

                                          1945, 1875, 1984, 1914, 1973, 455,

                                          1500, 1975, 1956, 1948, 1950, 950,

                                          750, 910, 505, 66, 925, 1250, 1700.



              41.1.Alr ".."   '           "


                                                                                 tit           a
                                                                                             A.
                                                                           1 03173650


                                                e
                                  .....              ...
                                                                ..--
                                          I. ..Z."
                                                           ,-...._,.."._




                Look at the photograph of a 200-ougiya note. Compare                                                ,
                it with bank notes you have and read the denominations
                in Arabic.


                                                           *41*
                                                                                  62
                                                                                           Hosted for free on livelingua.com
SHOPPING:                                                        LESSON          FIVE
FOODS AND BASIC NECESSITIES



ADDITIONAL MATERIAL:     Common necessities.
    drink              /shara:b/

    tea                /atay/

    water              /ma/

   milk                /laban/

   juice               /casi:r/

   coffee              /ka : va/

   food                /1u:ki:1/

   meat                /laham/

   rice                /ma:ru/

   bread               /mburu/

   sugar               /sukkar/

   eggs                /baydh/

   matches             /alima: t/

   bottle              /bu:sh/

   bag                 /mukhla/

   box                 /buta/

                                    *42*


                                           63Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON FIVE                                                         SHOPPING.
                                         FOODS AND BASIC NECESSITIES



Activities    1    Learn these words and keep notes on any common
                   alternatives ou may hear
              .,
                   Add to these words any which            vou    feel are im-
                   portant in your daily activities
                   Practice using them in the dialogue about shopping

                            out \ our shopping* lists in Arabic
                   Ai.      olass pro)ect,. plan a picnic or a dinner to be
                   o:eked   the ,:roup Learn ihe Arabic for every-
                   thin which :,cu need t.) isuy. and go leek for them
                         Yne market
                   \.'cu        pr- al v learn the French equivalents for
                   the item on the adjacent pa :-.;e as quickly as the
                   Arabic      in order to improve- your' Arabic, avoid
                   ds-ing  a:: your shk.,ppim-.; in the supermarkets. Go
                          ea:- where you know people are more likely to
                   :-,p7-ak Arabic   In any case. make sure that w en-
                   ever you learn a new French word for something.
                   you also learn the Arabic




                                               64          Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                  SHOPPING: MAKING A REQUEST
                                 Lesson Six




Objective:    At the end of this lesson. you should be able to ask for
              something you want in a shopping situation: to under-
              stand simple units of weight.

Translation   Shopkeeper:       How are you today?
of Dialogue
              Customer          Fine thanks    I want a kilo of apples.
                                half a kilo of rice, and a quarter of a
                                kilo of sugar
              Shopkeeper         Anything else?
              Customer           Yes. : want some bread too.
              Shopkeeper           K       That's 2     ougiya.
              Customer           Here you are
              Shorkreper         Thanks

                   Yem;r:;:e the                 by practicing the lines with
                    friend or classmate
                   Try to ask each other questions regarding the in-
                   fo rma::on     in   the dialogue.         For example.            "How
                   much are matches"-

Sugges:lons        F.an a class tea r mid-morning snack. Learn the
                   names ;f the 1:ems you will need in Arabic. Choose
                       items and      x gr:ups of two to a shop or the
                                         -zo

                   m.arke:   Get :n:y  sma quantities cf each so you
                   :an practice   skinc- for things in more than one
                   shot.:

                            the Arabic                for writing practice. Write
                      ou: as many times as you need in order to be
                   able 7: pr: duce consistent copies cf the model in



                                       x4.4x




                                                          65
                                                           Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON SIX
                                                      (--Y"L`Lil c)-$-),1)1


                                        (
             E2.     .-
                   -11..1




                                    (,c----.




                                               *45*
                                                       66
                            :   (   1




                                                              Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                     LESSON SIX




            S
                (S)

>A)-t'                                   CS } (-L"

         As?                                      f-P.




         *46*

                      67
                           Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON SIX                                                  SHOPPING:
                                                    MAKING A REQUEST



BASIC MATERIAL:      Dialogue for Memorization.
      /ta:jir/                /sh- ha:l -ak il-yawm?/

      /mishta:ri/    -        /il-hamdu li-lla:h. ndu:r ki:du tuva:h
                              wa nuss ki:lu ma:ru wa ruba ki:lu sukkar/

      /ta:jir/                /wa:sh?/

      /mishta:ri/             /alli:h ndu:r mbu:ru mir,walli/

      /ta:jir/                /aywa. ha:dhi mi:yati:n u:gi:ya/

      /mishta:,ri/            /ha:k/

      /ta:jir/                /shukran/




 Notes on the Dialogue:
 1.     /ndu:r/ means "I want".     See Grammar Handbook (Section on
        Verbs) and Additional Material in this Lesson.
 2.     /tuva:h/ means "apple(s)". The french word "pommes" is
        also uged.
 3.     /nuss/ means "half". /rubac/ means "quarter".
 4.     /wa:sh/ in this context means "anything else".
 5.     /mbu:ru/ is an African-derived word for "bread".
 6.     /mmwalli/ means "also" or "too".
 7.     /aywa/ means "all right" or "O.K." in agreement.
 8.     /ha:dhi/ here means "That's..." or "It's..." See lesson on
        Demonstratives in Grammar Handbook.




                                  *47*
                                              66
                                                         Hosted for free on livelingua.com
          II




                                                                         (111 it
                                                                                          la*      .11

                                                                                                                             141,0
                                                                             ,4
                                                                                                                  6' , dp- 0:61,..*              4::.;11,11

                                                                                                          sPir                          .111P,.1;Nta.
                                                                             :-!c,41/1 u' IV
                                            1,111,
                                                     111.,
                                                                                                   tO    IS"                          k:01 \nt'a
                                                                                                                                                                     1141:$
                                                              ,          00               Adow...
                                                                                                                     am.

                                                                                                                            do:a= ff                               spl,                               lir
                                    1
                                                                                                                                       01 ;"                        ,,,,,,011116
                                                                                                                                                                                    ,'imbriir .46.
                                                                                                                                                                                                           1111
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -116C'''.2---
                                                                                            so, 411.
                                        ,

                                                                                      I
                                                                                                                                                                   470- r
                                                     '
                                                                    at                        I  ). OOP                          r"
                                                                                                                                                                                ,,,,,,a,t;;Olo
                                                                                                                                                                                 Iii,,.....-   44,P;-
                                                 1




     ISAVP1 4tr tit              "                                                                                                                                                                              aim 111. AS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ifti4 bil
      gov
 lk*le 441
                     , INZ t. to.".
            (tot titr,940,-a4b dP44                                                                                                                                                     Tril41:::rit.::1174`
                                                                                                                                                                                                           o'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                - 4'




                                     so -
ril         otif,qr.           411:41berl                                                                                                                                              "A..
          "11' t
                        a.,                                                                                          r.          -       7-              11.R.
                                                                                                                                                                   $10111,*
                                                                                                                                                                                        di       I   4!"         1011 tit
                       =1111111
                                                                                                         I!
                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                             I
                                                                                                                           Le.
                                                                                                                                         ,4.11                J11)411.4
                                                                                                                                                                                -, ea   dow,                    S            V 40
                          ,
                                             ,ice                        i




    41 11               "T.
                         aft  411
                                                                                            104
                                                                                               OP' outlie


                                                                                             * .0t) I 411
                                                                                                              ,                           NIP
                                                                                                                                                   4126                         iv
                                                                                                                                                                       o 1 1- f 0
                                                                                                                                                                                       pi
                                                                                                                                                                                             *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        34.,,,,e4.11,A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       11.             .1



                                                                                                                                                               'Ito                              qz11;140.111-
                                                                                                                                                              1.,11-1..T.''.1
                                                                                                                                                                    a 4. ,- ap-.4ie. I '046,
                                                                                                                                                                                         &P.'    ft  I, r.f.r.
                                                                                                                                                                                             4,13 p 6 40
                         -`114844


                                    *4141NIT                                               /*Po                                                  14                                                                    I

                                                              II
                                                                         14,44
                                                                             4
                                                                                           " IMP



                                                                                                   111104.4.1


                                                             I I.   .411,




                                                                    0,7; .--,virt                                                                       ).
                                                                    441111
                                                                                                   4f1                                                         401101/r'"     1,.

                                                                                                                                                                       ,ilf
                          r
  LA .4;t,                                                                                       r                                                  ,..J 1141

                   e

   ..!1




                                                                                                                                                                              Hosted for free on livelingua.com
SHOPPING:                                                      LESSON SIX
FOODS AND BASIC NECESSITIES



ADDITIONAL MATERIAL:         Illustration.



  Cu lturrl Note on Marketing:                                                     1


  Since most of the fruits and vegetables folind in Nouakchott are
  imported the use of French to identify rhem is probably more
  common than Arabic. However, look at the list of several common
  vegetables identifiable in this picture. and learn the names of
  others which you find in the "boutiques.' or "supermarches" of the
  capital. You may be surprised to learn that many Maures seldom
  eat vegetables at all.


Vocabulary :
     onions          bus]
     potatoes         bumditayri
     carrots          ka.rut/
     lettuce salad
     tomat,,es       'tama:ti

Activities       1   Find out the words for "okra", "eggplant", "cab-
                     bage".   -auliflower". "squash" or zucchini, and
                     "cucumber"     Many of these words in French, but
                     try to see if you can find out the Arabic.
                 I   Color   the illustration   using crayons or colored
                     pencils. learning the names for colors and the ob-
                     jects you color as you go along.   They are included
                     in Lesson 13.




                                     *49*

                                                70
                                                        Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON SIX                                                           SHOPPING:
                                         FOODS AND BASIC NECESSITIES



ADDITIONAL MATERIAL:




  Cultural Note on Markets in the Arabic World:
 A central market or /sug, ("marsa" in Mauritania) is an important
 feature of most Arab cities. Here goods and products are bought
 and sold, and the activities serve as a social focal point for both
 men and women. At the time of this writing, the central market in
 Nouakchott has ceased to function due to a fire. The activities of
 the market have been dispersed to a variety of locations, including
 sidewalk stalls such as vou see in the illustration here


Vc.abulary         (fruits and useful verbs).

    apples               tuva:h
                         pum


    orang-c.s          ,/ura nj

    bananas             /band :n/

    grapes              ,,canab/

             ;2)       /1:. mun,

                       /si : trun

    buy                  yishri/

    sell                 vibi: c,

    pay f r             'yikhallus/



                                      *50*

                                                  71
                                                       Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON SIX
                                                                           SHOPPING:
                                               FOODS AND BASIC NECESSITIES




              11114141,,f




                                                 ---"Ift-94`ftTh1-4'44
Activities:    1.      Learn the words for fruits which interest you.
                       Note any variations you hear. Start keeping a
                       notebook    with English-Arabic and Arabic-English
                       entries for the new words which you learn.
              2.       Practice writing in your notebook new words in
                       Arabic script, using as a model your teacher's
                       handwriting.
                       Observe the following conjugation of the verb "want"
                       in Hassaniya.
                            I want       /ndu:r/
                            you (m) want /ddu:r/
                            you (f) want       /ddu: ri/
                            he wants           /idu:r/
                            she wants          /ddu:ri
                            we want       /ndu:ru/
                            you (pi) want /ddu:ru/
                            they (p1)          /idu:ru/

                                        *51*

                                                    72
                                                                  Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                             JOBS AND OCCUPATIONS

                                     Lesson Seven




Objectives:       1.    At  14 e end of the Basic Material, you should be
                        able to explain what you do in Mauritania (or what
                        you are going to do) , and ask someone else what
                        their job is.
                       When you study the Additional Material, you should
                       be able to give the names of several common oc-
                       cupations in Arabic.

Translation   Khadija:       What's your job?
of Dialogue
              Mary:             I'm a nurse in the hospital.
              Khadija:       And your friend John-what does he do?
              Mary:          He's a teacher in Attar.

Activities:   1.       Memorize the dialogue.
                       Practice the lines of one speaker with a classmate
                       responding.
              3        1ry to carry on a sustained chat with someone, be-
                       ginning with greetings and carrying on with ques-
                       tions like "What do you do?" or "What's your job?"
Suzgestions   1        Learn the names for the jobs of people working on
for Use:               your training program. Often the jobs are describ-
                       ed in the same terms as in local ministries or agen-
                       cie

                       Take a walking tour of your training site reading.'
                       the signs above shops and stores. See if the
                       names of occupations are contained in any of the
                       signs.
              3        Use the Arabic dialogue as writing practice. Write
                       it out as many times as you feel necessary for you
                       to be able to produce consistent copies of either the
                       model in your book or your teacher's handwriting.
                                        x52*




                                                           Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                                      73
LESSON SEVEN




                       L:4)                  j)     (,
                                         -



(   9   .
                                             1.4)
               csr4;1"        0


                Ls I




                                                  74
                                  *53*

                                                         Hosted for free on livelingua.com
     C.         \(   0'1 ' ''''
                                                                      LESSON SEVEN




                        (         -                    "
                                           Sr"'
                                                   0




                            1
                                                   1, 1
                                (S


c_   1    ,.
       __'_ .

 -1.A1e,s....)




                                           --
                                       t
                                           9    _.}-')




                                      *54*



                                                           75 Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON SEVEN                                        JOBS AND OCCUPATIONS




BASIC MATERIAL:      Dialogue for Memorization.
      / khadi:ja/         /shinhi shughlt-ik?/
      /mayri/             /ana tbi : ba vi-t-tab/
      /khadi:ja/          /wa sa:hib-ik ju:n, shinhi shughlt-u?/
      /mayri/             /huwa garra:' shu:r ata:r/


 Notes on the Dialogue:
 1.    /shinhi shughlt-ik?/ means literally "what-job-your?"             See
       Grammar Handbook lesson on Possessives.
 2.    /tbi:ba/ is a noun, in this case describing a woman nurse. A
       male nurse would be /tbi:b,'. See section on Gender in the
       Grammar Handbook.
 3.    / tab/ is a Mauritanian word meaning "hospital" or "clinic."
 4.    ,'s a: hib/ means "friend". /sa:hib-i/ is "my friend."           "My
       girlfriend" would be /saha:btii.
 5.    /garra:'/ means "teacher".
 6.    /shu:r/ is a word which means "in" or "tards."
 7.    /ata:r/ is a town in the north of Mauritania.




                                    *55*            76
                                                            Hosted for free on livelingua.com
JOBS AND OCCUPATIONS                                               LESSON SEVEN




ADDITIONAL MATERIAL:             Jobs and work places.
Activities:       1.   Using the additional vocabulary in the lists which
                       follow,try to create as many variations of the
                       original dialogue as possible.
Vocabulary:      Jobs (given in the masculine gender).
     volunteer              ,   mutatawwic

     nurse doctor (m.) /tbi:b/

     nurse doctor (f. )     /tbi:ba/                                                  1
                                                                      "1.................0-
                                                                              -.

     teacher                /garra: '/                                   $    1)
     director               , mudi:r/

     driver                 ,,'shu:fi:r,                           Y.,"".
     secretary              /sikriti:r

    merchant                ita:jir,                                         xP. 1;

    minister                , wa : zir/
                                                                     f-;_,
    engineer                    muhandis
                                                                  CY) )4'LNe

    president                   ra'i:s/
                                                                     35-5-")


    Prime Minister              ra'i:s il-uzara          -51./.;,931 04-"1::




                                          ):36*


                                                   77 Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON SEVEN                                      JOBS AND OCCUPATIONS



                                                                        ...
      official                   /mu' adhdhaf /
        (Hfonctionnaire" )                                        Liliy'
      sheikh/elder              /shaykh/

     hairdresser                /halla: g/

     tailor                     /khayya: t/

     farmer                     /valla.h/

     guard                      /garddiyan/


Work places :
     clinic, hospital           /tab/

     office                     /maktab/

     shop                       /bu : ti: g/

     market                     /marsa/

     field                      /hagl/

     P .M . I .   (French . )   /P.M.I./


 Note :

 /ya/ is an expression used before a name or a title as a form of ad-
 dress to show people that you are trying to catch their attention.
 /ya mu h ammad! / might translate roughly as "Hey, Muhammed !" Lis-
 ten for this word to see how people use it.

                                    *57*

                                                  78
                                                         Hosted for free on livelingua.com
JOBS AND OCCUPATIONS                                     LESSON SEVEN
NUMBERS 1000-1,000,000



ADDITIONAL MATERIAL:     Cardinal numbers 1000-1,000,000
    1000               /alv/                                                   k




    2000               /alvayn/
                                                                               k




    3000               /ithlatala : v/                .x.9%          lj>G1

    4000               /arbacala:v/                  ,--.J% 6uu/1

    5000               /akhamsala:v/                 -->> % -ct.i) i


    6000               /sittala:v/                      V /%
                                                           .`) c1; ...)


    7000               /isbacala:v/                 Ls.          %   it.a._.... 1



   8000                /ithmanala : v/              L_>.%            ;LA; L        I




   9000                /itsacala:v/                  (..... J        .1-1,.......;41




    10,000             /acsharala:v/                (._:"., %)   %    a    .:1...g



    1,000,000          /mi:lyu:n/
                                                                 .0 7?-.4"




                         *58*

                                            79
                                              Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON SEVEN                                      JOBS AND OCCUPATIONS
                                                  NUMBERS 1000 - 1.000.000




Activities:    1.   Learn to use and recognize as many of the hig.i
                    thousands as you need for your everyday needs.
               2    Play numbers :awes with your teacher and class-
                    mates
                    Write some numt-m.-:rs out in Arabic figures and word:,

                    H ad these numbers out in Arabic. and then ; rite
                    them out in your copy book.
                         '3500 .   15000. 5250, 3500, 825, 2500, 8000. 3100.

                         7e45.     12:, 0. 500000. 7250. 4520, 105000.



    or_
                                                                        1




                                            02134362 14




                                                      4
                                                           %;... ..i.
                                                                "




                                     *59*




                                                           Hosted for free on livelingua.com
          TALKING ABOUT DURATION AND LEARNING ARABIC
                               Lesson Eight




Objective:     1.   At the end of this lesson, you should be able to
                    tell someone how long you have been in Mauritania
                    and to respond to comments on your ability to use
                    the Arabic language.

Translation    Abdulrahman:        Hello.
of Dialogue:
               Steve:              Hello.
               Abdulrahman:        How long have you been in Mauritania?
               Steve:              Just a month.
               Abdulrahman:        You speak Hassaniya very well.
               Steve:              Thanks.    I want to learn.
               Abdulrahman:        Do you know how to read and write
                                   as well?
               Steve:              Yes, I do. A little.
               A odulrahman:       That's great!

Activities:    1.   Memorize both parts of the dialogue and practice it
                    with a friend or classmate.
               2    Substitute other time expressions in the dialogue
                    (i.e. two weeks, three days, etc.)




                                  *60*




                                              81Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON EIGHT




             C
                                 c    '-.''                  >




       ...


     s'-'            .,>_




                 1




                                     -.... .}52-       -1.A.,9 I
                       c_s --'                     .




                                            j'i         LY-J




                                               *61*
                                                                   82
                                                                        Hosted for free on livelingua.com
      & l':"      u,;) \                                         LESSON EIGHT




                            er-'4-    c ->L';'''
                            ( yt,:)-) \ 6(tis   ,
           (...




                                        sy,\TA.)
                             ,_y,'




,I,

                                     *62*


                                                    83
                                                         Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON EIGHT                                   TALKING ABOUT DURATION
                                                  AND LEARNING ARABIC



BASIC MATERIAL:       Dialogue for Memorization:
            /abdu-rahman/                      /is-sala :mu calay-kum/
            /sti:v/                            /ucalay-kum is-sala:m/
            /abdu-rahman/                      /kam 1-ak vi muri:ta:niya?/
            /sti:v/                           /shahr. awtu : f/
           /abdu-rahman/
                    _                         /titkallam hassaniya
                                                          _         zayn hatta/
           /sti: v/                 -         /shukran. nibqi nitcallam/
           /abdu-rahman/                      /taCraf taktub wa tagra mmwalli/
           /sti:v/                  -         /ahi:h m.. -raf shway/
           /abdu-rahman/            -         /zayn hatta/


 Notes on the Dialogue:
 1.    /kam 1-ak vi/ means literally "how much for you in        Here it
       conveys the equic alent to the English "How long have you
       been in ...?" For further reference, see Grammar Handbook on
       Interrogatives .
 2.    /shahr/ means "month"    .   /shahrayn/ is "two months". See
       Grammar Handbook for a lesson on the Duals and Plurals .
 3.    /awtu:f/ mnns "only" or "that's all."
4.    /ritkallam/ .means "you speak". See Grammar Note in this Les-
      son and Grammar Handbook on the Present Tense.
5.    /il-kala:m it -bay d h a:ni/ literally "speech of the whites" ,
      another way to say Hassaniya Arabic. You may hear this . is
6.    /nibqi nitcallam/ means literally "I want I learn" in Arabic.
      See explanation in Grammar Note which follows           Sometimes
                                                               .

      /nibqi/ is pronounced as /nibghi/
7.    /taCraf taktub wa tagra/ means literally "you know you write
      and you read"   .   See Grammar Note.




                                    *63*
                                                 84
                                                          Hosted for free on livelingua.com
TALKING ABOUT DURATION                                        LESSON EIGHT
AND LEARNING ARABIC




SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL:        Grammar Note.
   Present Tense Verbs.
   The present tense in Arabic obeys a regular and predictable pat-
   tern: each verb consists of a "stem", in most cases made up of
   three letters, which carries the meaning of the verb. "I," "you,"
   "he," "she" etc., are indicated by prefixe's and suffixes added to
   the "stem". These prefixes and suffixes remain absolutely con-
   stant from one verb to another.
   The prefixes are added to the "stem" by ore of the short vowels,
   which we call the "helper" vowel which remains the same within
   any one verb.      You may hear some regional differences in
   Mauritania as to which short vowel is used as the helper vowel in
   some verbs. Keep your ears open and imitate what you hear most
   used around you in your town.
   Here is the verb "speak":
   I speak              /nitkallam/

   you speak (m)        /titkallam/

   you speak (f)        /titkallami/

   he speaks            /yitkallam/

   she speaks           /titkallam/

   we speak             /nitkallamu/

   you speak (pi)       /titkallamu/

   they speak           /yitkallamu/
   (For fufther information, refer to the section on "Verbs" in the
   Grammar Handbook).




                                 -64-

                                         85 Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON EIGHT                           TALKING ABOUT DURATION
                                          AND LEARNING ARABIC



ADDITIONAL MATERIAL:   Language learning vocabulary .

   book                   /ikta : b/

   pen                    /glam/

   paper                  /ta: ghat/
   notebook               /karna/
   blackboard            /sabu : ra/

   chalk (2)             /kray,/

                         /tibshi:r/
   teacher (2)           /mucallim/

                         /garra : 1/

   pupil                 /talmidi/

   he stures             /yagra /

   he teaches            /ydarras/
   he learns             /yitcallam/

   he reads              /yigra
   he writes             /yiktub/
   sentence              /jumla/

   cord                  /kalima/

   letter                /harf/


                              *65*

                                       86
                                                 Hosted for free on livelingua.com
TALKING ABOUT DURATION                                     LESSON EIGHT
AND LEARNING ARABIC



I forgot.               /nasayt/

Arabic                  /carabia/

Hassaniya               /il-kala:m il-baydha:ni[ ;             r >1-(43

dialect                 /lahja/

classical               /vusha/                              Ev"-gi

English                 /ingli:zia/                              ti




French (2)              /varansia/

                        /vransa:mna/
                                                     Zis,1-4A.Z.);

Wolof                   /wuluf/

Peular (2)              /pula:r/
                        /itka : ri : r/


write! (to a male)*     /iktub/

read! (to a male)*      /igra/

repeat! (to a male)*    /cal/

*See Grammar Handbook for further reference on imperatives.

                                     *66*


                                                   Hosted for free on livelingua.com

                                              87
LESSON EIGHT                                TALKING ABOUT DURATION
                                                AND LEARNING ARABIC




What's he doing?            ish-yeaddal?/           (
He writes ...               /yaktub/
(For further reference, see Grammar Handbook lesson on Present Tense
and/or on the Active Participle.



 Cul`ural Note:
 Spend time with children, as they are excellent language resources
 and very good teachers as they have a limited vocabulary and are
 willing to repeat things far more often than some adults. Find out
 what you can about the educational system h Mauritania, both tradi-
 tional and modern. Do not be surprised if many people you meet are
 unable to read and write Arabic and express surprise that you can
 do so yourself.



                               *67*
                                            88
                                                        Hosted for free on livelingua.com
               TALKING ABOUT AND LEARNING ARABIC
                                Lesson Nine




Objective:     By learning these basic phrases you should be able
               to get yourself out of French-speaking situations when
               you would prefer to use your Arabic. You should also
               begin to learn when and where Arabic is appropriate.


Translation    Mohammed:        Hello.        (in French)
of Dialogue:
               John:            Hello.        (in Arabic)
               Mohammed:        What do you want?            (in French)
               John:            I don't speak French.             (in Arabic)
               Mohammed:        You speak Arabic?
               John:            Yes.     It     trying!


Activities:    If your teacher is also a French speaker, he or she
               can act out the part of Mohammed, who insists, at first,
               on speaking French with a European. Act out the dia-
               logue, memorizing the lines of the learner.
Sugge2tions    Learn to judge the appropriateness of language use
for Use:       in Mauritania.   There are clearly situations where you
               will have to use some French in order to communicate,
               but many people who are not native speakers of
               Hassaniya can still communicate with you in Arabic.




                                       *68*




                                                            8fi
                                                             Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON NINE




                                 Bonjour




              Qu'est-ce que vous voulez?




                                           Hosted for free on livelingua.com
            W

1.)   cy.       .)                                          LESSON NINE




                                 Bonjour




       Qu'est-ce que vous voulez ?                                         ,...t...:,




                     J'            cu.... I                           0 ,-4)



            p




                          *70*



                                   9i         Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON NINE                                             TALKING ABOUT
                                                       LEARNING ARABIC



BASIC MATERIAL: Dialogue for Practice.
      /muhammad/          Bonjour
      /ju:n/              /ucalay-kum is-sala:m/
      /muhammad/          Qu'est-ce que vows voulez?
      /ju:n/              /ma nitkallam varansa:wia/
      /muhammad/          /titkallam carabi?/
      /ju:n/              /ahi:h nuha:wil/


 Notes on the Dialogue:
 1.    /ma nitkallam/ shows the use of the negative with verbs.
       /ma/ before a verb make3 it negative. Set- Grammar Handbook
       lesson on Negatives with verbs.
 2.    Aaransa:wia/ means "French" (adj.) or "the French lan-
       guage".
 3.    /nuha : wil/ means "I try".



 Cultural No Le on Language Use in Mauritania:
You will face a number of obstacles in learning Arabic in
Nouakchott. As a European, you will find that most people will
automatically address you in French, and even answer you in
French should you begin by speaking Arabic. You will have to
insist on using Arabic where it is appropriate. Although some
culture groups in Mauritania do not speak Arabic, many in
Nouakchott readily understand it. You will need to learn some
basic French (xclich will come to you quite easily comparised
to Arabic, because of its similarity to English). Make sure that
whatever you learn to say in French you also learn to say in
Arabic. If you learn a new word from a sign or an advertismt -t,
look for the Arabic script translation as well. You may wit. :o
learn more about the African languages in use in part of Mauritania.
For further reference, see Lesson 20 in the Literacy Handbook.



                                    *71*     92
                                                       Hosted for free on livelingua.com
ESSENTIAL VOCABULARY & IDIOMS                        LESSON NINE




ADDITIONAL MATERIAL:
    finished, over      /uva:t/
    called, named       /inga:1/
    true, right         /hagg/
   Not true.            /ma:hu hagg/
   really, certain      /bead/
   soon                 /ura shway/
   each, every          /kull/
   above                /Cawg/
   below               /taht/
   inside              /wasat/
   without             /min du:n/
   someone             /had/
   any/everyone        /kull had/
   yet                 /ma va:t/
   almost              /gat/
   before (2)          /sa:big/
                       /gbal/
  after (2)            /ca:gib/
                       ioacad/
  "Don't interrupt."   /ha : ni: -ni/
  "Let me continue."
  "Wait a bit."        /ha:ni shway/
  "Give me a little    /zi : d shway/
    more."


                           *72*

                                        93 Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON NINE                       ESSENTIAL VOCABULARY & IDIOMS




    "Leave me alone."       /Ichalli:-ni
    "What's happening."     /sh-kha:lig/
    "What's up with you?"   /ma: l-ak?/
   from time to time        /marra marra/                     ..>
                                                           o ..),*   11.).--

    This is very
     important."
                            ,fliadha muhim _hatta/                    \A
                                                             cr




                                              94
                               *73*
                                                     Hosted for free on livelingua.com
              DESCRIBING A SIMPLE OPERATION: MAKING TEA

                                   Lesson Ten




Objective:       At the end of this lesson. you will be able to give a
                 step-by-step account of a simple operation (in this case
                 making tea).

Translation      1.   Buy tea. sugar. and mint
of Steps:             Fill a kettle with water and let it boil.
                 3    Put the tea and a little hot water in a teapot to
                      wash the tea
                 4    Fill the teapot with 'lot water.
                 5    Let the teapot sit on the brazier for two minutes.
                 6    Take the teapot off the brazier.
                 7    Add the sugar and the mint.
                      Pour the tea into the glasses.
                 9    Pour it back into the teapot.
                10    Taste and serve.
                       Repeat the process for the second and third glasses
                      leaving the tea pot on the brazier a little longer each
                      time. etc.)

Activities       1    I-sing the series of pictures on page 78. try to re-
                      construct the whole operation, using the new vo-
                      cabulary Ask your teacher if there are other steps
                      that should be included
                2     Make tea. Mauritanian style, as an activity in class.
                      Get your teacher to say what he/she is doing at
                      each step.    Learn the steps and try making tea
                      while describing the process. If your teacher uses
                      words or phrases that differ from those in the
                      book. write them down and learn to recognize them.

                                    x74*




                                                         Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON TEN   y.:iti 1 0., 3J t




             Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                                                        LESSON TEN




                                  z1;i)                    CS   J4)
             q.L.o        Lltd         t.}-L                     S1-'

lc   LLI
                     Ci          2      4\-           )k          1J?                      3




                      (511)   1-11            )Yk               c5t,                      4

               1-4.x.1)                   -)11?                 (5t2P


           41"))" 3.);                   .)\-;."`
                                                                                          1


                                               Cu I




                                 ks'           G                                          1

                                                                                          to
                     c'"Gk)          csk-g




                                                           Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON TEN
                                                                    MAKING TEA




Basic Material:       Making tea.
     1.        /ishri waraga wa sukkar wa nacnac/
     2.        /imla il-maghraj bil-ma wa khall-u yighli/
     3.        /di:r it waraga wa shway min it -ma ha:mi vi 1-Larra:d yaka:n
               tighsul il-waraga/
     4.        /imla it -barra:d bil-ma ha:mi/
     5.        /khalli il-barra:d fawg il-furna dagi:gatayn/
    6.         /zu:3 11- barra.d min fawg il-furna/
    7.         /di:r is-sukkar wa 1-nacnac/
    8.         /subb atay vi-l-ki:sa:n/
    9.         /subb atay vi 1-barra:d marra tha:niya/
    10.        /dhu:g wa cati 1-in-na:s/



 Notes on Basic Material:
          1.    Every sentence in this sequence begins with an imperative
                in the masculine form. See Grammar Handbook Lesson on
                Imperatives.
         2.     /yaka:n tighsul/ means literally "in order that you wash."
         3.     /di.r/ means "put".
         4.     /fawg/ here means "on top of".
         5.     /zu:1/ here means "remove".
      6.        /marra tha:niya/ means literally "a time second" but means
                "once again".
      7.        /cati 1-in-na:s/ means literally "give to the r;:kiple".
      8.        /lahmu:m/ is a word you will hear, and means "charcoal."


                                       *77*
                                                      98
                                                                Hosted for free on livelingua.com
 MAKING TEA
                                                              LESSON TEN




Suggestions        If you are invited to have tea with Mauritanian
for Use:           friend, ask to observe the ceremonyasurrounding
                   the making of the tea.
              2.   Write out the Arabic of this Lesson for further
                   practice.
              3.    Use this "operation" (making tea) as a model for
                    describing simple processes.   Try to construct
                   other simple operations (boiling an egg,
                   rice or cous-cous, washing a wound, etc.)cooking
                                                              which
                   you can perform and learn the Arabic for from  an
                   informant. Learn any vocabulary necessary for
                   your own work.       Refer to the Supplementary
                   Material in this Lesson for additional words and
                   phrases.

                                *78*

                                            9i     Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON TEN                                  DESCRIBING OPERATIONS




ADDITIONAL MATERIAL:     Verbs of process and function (in the Impera-
tive).
     repair/fix (2)         /sallih/
                            /caddil/

     open                   /ivtah/

     close                 /igval/

     take                  /igbadh/

     turn                  /igban/

     work/function (2)     /ishtaghal/
                           /icmal/

     stop                  /gi:f/

     start                 /isnati/

  Expressions:
     it doesn't work       /ma yistaghal/

     it doesn't matter     /la ba:s/

    like this              /bi-ha:1 ha:dha/              \ :,Liii   61.x,

    broken                 /midagdag/

    right                  /hagg/

    wrong                                                           ..t.e.),:s
                           /ghalat/
                               *79*
                                              0      Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                    TALKING ABOUT WHERE YOU LIVE

                                Lesson Eleven




Objective:      At the end of this lesson, you should be able to respond
                to questions about your place of residence, and describe
                in simple terms its location.

Translation     Nafissa:   How long have you been in Nouakchott?
of Dialogue:
                Betsy:     About 2 months.
               Nafissa:    Where do you live?
               Betsy:      I have a house near the new mosque.
               Nafissa:    The Saudi mosque?
               Betsy:      Yes, that's right.

Activities     1.    Memorize the dialogue and practice it with a friend
                    or your teacher.
               2.   Using the variants for duration of time, change the
                    answer to the question posed in the first line.
                    Learn the name of the place you are staying so you
                    can answer with the appropriate response.

Suggestions    1.   Learn the names for the various quarters in town.
for Use:            Find out what the names mean , or why certain
                    areas are called in the way they are.
               2.   Draw a map of your town or site and learn the
                    names of important locations.
               3.   Use the map of Nouakchott on page 86 to discuss
                    important places in town, how to get from one plat'
                    to another, the construct "where is      with pre-
                    positions of location.




                                   *80*




                                                IJ iHosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON ELEVEN
                                                                 -Y`     "' cc -L' Lf,:)')

                c.   17                                                 /


                                          4.1-.4.2...   ..11.;      (L.).) 1...4.4.x.>




                                              c,  .       9.J L.,...)        (5:-



                                                                                     1




                          C
                                     ,_..5 ...) "I? ....s ,->-1 k      A...0.4-...4.1




                                                                                         k




                                                      *81*
                                                                 V2                          Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                              t ..
       LESSON ELEVEN




Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON ELEVEN                                         TALKING ABOUT WHERE
                                                                  YOU LIVE




BASIC MATERIAL:       Dialogue for Memorization.
       /nafi: sa/     -    /kam 1-ik vi nu:akshu:t?/
       /bitsi/             /shahrayn tagri:ban/
       /nafi: sa/     -    /mnayn sa:kina?/
       /bitsi/             /cand-i da : r gari:ba min il-masjid il-jadi : d/
       /nafi:sa/           /il- masjid is-sucu:di?/
       /bitsi/        -    /ahi:h hagg/


 Notes on the Dialogue:
  1.     /kam 1-ik/ means "how much for you?" addressed to a woman.
         /kam 1-ak/ is the form for a man. See Grammar Handbook
         lesson on Interrogatives.
  2.     The suffix /-ayn/ added to a noun makes it "dual" or "two of"
         the same. See Grammar Handbook lesson on Plurals.
 3.      /tagri:ban/ means "about" or "approximately".
 4.      /sa:kina/ means literally "living". To a man, you would say
         /mnayn sa:kin?/. The verb in this case is what we call an
          "Active Participle". See Grammar Handbook for further ex-
         planation.
  5.     /gari:ba min/ means literally "near from". In this case, the
         feminine /gari:ba/ is used since /da:r/ is feminine.
  6.     /il-masjid it -jadi:d/ literally means "the mosque the new".
         For an explanation of this, see the Section on "Adjectives with
          Nouns" in the Grammar Handbook.
  7.      /is-sucu:di/ here is an adjective meaning "Saudi" (Arabian).
  8.      /hagg/ means "That's right." or "That's correct."
                                                                                    -....-1




                                     *83*
                                            1 U4
                                                             Hosted for free on livelingua.com
WHERE YOU LIVE:
LOCATING PLACES                                          LESSON ELEVEN




ADDITIONAL MATERIAL:      Names of places & landmarks.
Learn the names of places which seem important to you. Use the ac-
companying list of prepositions and the map of Nouakchott locate
places and their relationship to each other. Try writing intoArabic
names of places you want to know and put them on the map in yourthe
book.
    where is...?       /minayn/

    office             /maktab/

    restaurant (2)     /mat cam/
                       irastu : ra : n/             L) 1,_30....Z....x.)

    hotel (2)          /uti:1/


    bank
                       /fundu:g/

                       /bank/
                                                               j    -
                                                                        AA)
                                                                               .



                                                                    __L.,

    embassy           /siva:ra/                              a, G.......)

   P .0 .             /bu:sta/

   market             /marsa/                                           ...,
   hospital (2)       /tab/
                                                                   (------1?
                      /mustashfa/

   cinema             /si: nama/                             L:1-A-A4-3


   ministry           /wiza:ra/
                                                           l )
   school             /madrasa/                       k..1.4,..>
                                                                   l ...LA

                                 *84*


                                          I I:: 5     Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                                                                               I

LESSON ELEVEN                                     WHERE YOU LIVE:
                                         PLACE NAMES 84 LANDMARKS



   mosque (2)         /masjid/                             -'2
                      /masyidi                   .A.......-.J-,


   airport            /mata-r/

   city (2)           /dashra/                e ..)...:1 .)
                      /madi:na/                 s--' -1.)

   desert, interior   /ba:diya/                  Zt.) .) L

   sea                /bahr/

   port/harbor        /wa : kh/
                                                   L'
   company            /shari:ka/              -=Cy'''




                                  *85*
                                           PG
                                                           Hosted for free on livelingua.com
WHERE YOU LIVE:                                           LESSON ELEVEN
LOCATIONS, DIRECTIONS



 SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL:           NOWZiChete




0 Saudi Akupe-              a Peacee. Clips office
O lila Nice_               Ca  lialear Harlot-
O Aiw Hospe.               6 Toucouleur Mosque_
@ isupermatice,            Q Old Aferket
0 Thench Embassy           (3 Poly Clinic.
60 U.S. Embassy            a Hata Mo.thaba_
   Presidency              'Z..)    Stadium_
CD Ministries



                                   *86*

                                                     Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                      O
                                            4h.
                             w. 4,1".I'
                             111111141%.,
                                            4.104191._,       .4

                                                          gook
                                  wyr
                                lust*                     "




Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                              TAKING A TAXI
                               Lesson Twelve




 Ob ctivt,      At the end of this lesson you should be able to get
                around Nouakchott using a taxi and understand the taxi
                system.

Translation
of Dialogue:   Randy:     Taxi! Taxi!
               Taximan: Where are you going?
               Randy:     I'm going to the 5eme.
               Taximan: O.K. Get in.
               *    *     *       (later)      *    *      *

               Randy:     Turn right at the Garden Road.
               Taximan: All right.
               Randy:     Turn left         Stop here.
               Taximan: O.K.        That's (give) 20 u.rn.
               Randy:     Here.     Thank you.
               Taximan: Goodbye.


Activities:    1.   Memorize this   dialogue and practice it with your
                    teacher or a friend.
               2.   Add to the lines of this dialogue with appropriate
                    personal information exchanges. Be prepared to be
                    queried on your origin, reason for being here, etc.
Suggestions    1.   Get into a taxi and ride around for an extended
for Use:            period of time, observing the sights. Many taxi
                    drivers may not speak Arabic, so be prepared with
                    your basic French.


                                     *88*




                                                         109Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                                                                .4
LESSON TWELVE
                                                                    _,"..,t clui 1 o.),

                             I
                                                                                              cS .1,--   /
                                         -A5 \


                    5\eme    2 .,)-''        'tS k.) ek                                        LS )---;

                                         S 2I       1
                                                          I")



                                         J              ..A.Ja.-+




                                          C'     \a droite                                     ...s ""
                                                    1     ...) I
                                                        /._                          (..)L,

                                                 a gauche

      n.A-,., 1   3,)--;--         Dyi            b=)
                                    I,     ,
                                     1}-,a, 3L2
                                 1: >ilk J t_Ls.)




                                                         110
                                   *89*
                                                                        Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                                             LESSON TWELVE




              I

                   L..c4"-C)            (5""                                   -.c. )- /
                       C
                       .   As
                                 ..,     ('ft                         U t,

  5 eme             ...).;,-,     as 1_,    C, t
                                                                                 .... A--)



                                           1)p1                           tf (.5,.--d




4,P LL''                              a droite                                 ci -)--

                                         1 ,,                           6 k)     -.Sj;
          _.),;)       jt9        a gauche                                      (.5 )2"/
                                                                                          f_

              ;`''''
                           I.
                            I j,i'.)
                                             /
                                           ....) l)
                                                                                             I.
                    1; >U.k > t:,..s         >)                        UL




                                *90*

                                                      Iii   Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON TWELVE                                                 TAKING A TAXI




BASIC MATERIAL: Dialogue for Memorization.
       /randi/              /taksi! taksi!/
       /taksi ma:n/          /minayn wa:cid?/
       /randi/               /ana Iva: cid shu: r 5'eme /
                                                      .


       /taksi ma:n/          /aywa irkib/
       *      *    *     /bacad shway/)       *      *    *
       /randi/         -     ia droit ma c a sha:ric la-harayyadh/
       /taksi ma:n/          /aywa/
       /randi/               A gauche gi: f hu :n/
       /taksi ma:n/          /zayn. ila:h cashri:n u:gi:ya/
       /randi/               /ha:k shukran/
       /taksi ma:n/          /waddacna-k it -mula : na/


 Notes on the Dialogue:
  1.       /wa:cid/ comes from a word meaning to have an al.. ointment
           and is used here to mean "Where are you going?"
  2.       /irkib/ is the imperative of the verb meaning to "get in", or
           "get on (e.g. a horse). To a woman it would be /irkibi/.
           See Grammar Handbook lesson on Imperatives for further refer-
           ence.
 3.        /maca sha:ric/ literally means "with the street" but translates
           here as "at" or "on".



  Cultural Note:
  You will notice that French expressions are widely used in indicating
  directions, money. time and for titles. Names of streets and neighbor-
  hoods may also be identified by their French names.                 Taxis in
 Nouakchott generally circulate along two principal routes: north and
 south along Ave. Kennedy out to the 5eme and along Ave. Nasser be-
 tween the hospital and the Ksar. Taking a taxi in a straight line on
 either of these two routes costs 10 u.m. If you wish to deviate from
 these routes in order to go to a particular location, the cost will be 20
  u.m.
                                                                                        J
                                      *91*         112
                                                               Hosted for free on livelingua.com
TAKING A TAXI
                                                            LESSON TWELVE




ADDITIONAL MATERIAL:     Prepositions for locating   :




    near to (2)        /ihadh min/
                       /gari: b min/

   far from         ibaci : d min/

   in front of         /gudda:m/

   behind              /wara/

   beside/next to      /ivzi: r/

   in                  /vi/

   from              /min/

   to                /ila/

   at               /cand/

   between          /bayn/

   straight ahead   /igb a :1/

                    /Cala to :1/

   on the left      /Gala i: d il-casri/
                                           5.1''",''x71 \   A-4 1      (515
  on the right      /cala i: d il-Cirbi/
                                            & ,r52-1        -k-t. 1    cskS

  here              /hu : xi/
                                                                      0,-'
  there             /hu : k/
                                   *92*
                                                 113Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON TWELVE                    TAKING A TAXI




  411111110..




                          ,Z
                       .'.. 't


                *93*
                                   Hosted for free on livelingua.com
        TALKING ABOUT THE VOLUNTEER ROLE IN DEVELOPMENT
                               Lesson Thirteen




Objective:    By the end of this lesson, you should be able to respond
              to questions about your role in Mauritania and its im-
              plications for development. When you learn the Supple-
              mentary Material, you should be able to recognize the
              Arabic terms for some organizations involved in de-
              velopment assistance.

Translation
of Basic
MatFiaT:      A:   What do you do in Mauritania?
              B:   I'm a volunteer with the Peace Corps.
              A:   What's that?
              B:   A volunteer with the P ace Corps cooperates and
                   works with the people.
              A:   How much are you paid per month?        (lit. "how much
                   do they pay you?")
              B:   About   ( amount)
              A:   Who pays you?
              B:   The American government.

Activities:   I.   Listen to some of your classmates "role-play" the
                   dialogue.
              2.   Make changes where appropriate, and memorize the
                   dialogue. Practice saying it with a classmate or;
                   friend.




                                   *94*


                                                   Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                                 /15
LESSON THIRTEEN




           C




                                  C




                     ,
                         1...i.-. ..)..9.)


                    (              / - ..




                                             116
                  *95*                             Hosted for free on livelingua.com
Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON THIRTEEN                         TALKING ABOUT THE VOLUNTEER
                                                 ROLE IN DEVELOPMENT



BASIC MATERIAL: Dialogue for Adaptation and Memorization.
      A:   /ash tcaddal vi mu:ri:ta:niya?/
      B:   /ana mutatawwic maca: hayyat is-sala:m/
      A:   /shinhu ha:dha?/
      B:                ..
           Al-mutatawwj En yi ca:wanu wa yishtaghalu
           ma ca sh-sha b/
      A:   /kam ykhallasu-k vi sh-shahr?/
      B:   /           tagri:ban/
      A:   /minhu ykhallas-ak?/
      B:   /il-haku:mat il-amri:kiya/



 Notes on the Basic Material:
 1.    /mutatawwi c /, "male volunteer". /mutat awwi c a/, "female volun-
       teer".
 2.    /yica:wanu/ means "they cooperate".
3.     /maca sh-shacb/ means, "with the people".
4.     /ykhallasu/, means "they pay".
5.     /ykhallas-ak/ - Note the suffix ending.    For further reference
       see Grammar Handbook Lesson on Direct Objects.
6.     /il-haku:mat il-amri:kiya/ is an example of the Genitive construc-
       tion. See Grammar Handbook for further practice.




                                                 118
                                    *97*                     Hosted for free on livelingua.com
TALKING ABOUT DEVELOPMENT                             LESSON THIRTEEN




SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL:       Names and terms important in Development.
    aid, assistance    /taca:win/

   development         /tatwi:r/

   change              /taghyi: r/

   to provide          /wufara/
                                                                 ,)
   project             imashru:c/

   USAID              /USAID/        (French)

   UNESCO             /UNESCO/ (French)

   UNICEF             /UNICEF/ (French)

   UNDP               /UNDP/ (French)
         (UN Development Program)

   "coop4rants"       /co-operants/ (French)

   WHO                /O.M.S./ (French)

   OAU (2)            /OUA/
                                           e-J'P `''"))))%
                      /munadhama il-wahida it -ifri:gi:ya/

   World Bank         /il-bank id-dawli/        L.51).11 SA...A

   United Natic.is    /il-umard il-mutahida/       -0_,L;a1
                                                                ( ))t

                                *98*                  Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                                11J
LESSON THIRTEEN                                       TALKING ABOUT DEVELOPMENT




    "Minis t5e de la
      Cooperation"             /wizart it- taca : win/             o , L01:-Jk
                                                                                              'ii/_j
   counterpart,
      colleague                /zami : 1/
                                                                                               J-:-')
   population                 /sukka : n/
                                                                                              6 -(---.
   inhabitant                 /sa : kan/
                                                                                               CiU-"
   country                    /balad/
                                                                                                      ...\..0

   province                   /wila : ya/
                                                                                              4-zi.) _55

   region/district            /mintaga/                                                          ..




   capital                    /ca : sima/
                                                                                              73tx-,P lg

   communications/
     transport                /taws : sila : t/                                  S,-, >k. 4 49        ,..;
  reconstruction              /ca : da il- bana' /                            _r t.:,...) %     -0, .) kg




                     / ,. i    p
                                      a   1   1   ,
                                                        7/ /
                                                          1               /
                        394f)ji-i
                            ,     d ,eli 3V ::,\.

             Verily in the messenger of Allah ye have a good example. .
                               (The Qur'an, XXXIII, 21)


                                                       12u
                                              *99*                        Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON THIRTEEN   TALKING ABOUT DEVELOPMENT




                           Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON THIRTEEN                          TALKING ABOUT DEVELOPMENT




Suggestions
for Use:      1.   Study each picture carefully and think about what
                   each might suggest about development problems and
                   solutions in Mauritania.
              2.   Ask your teacher for the vocabulary you need to
                   hold a discussion on these topics.
              3.   Prepare a small "speech" about one of the topics
                   and give it to the class.
              4.   Refer back to these pictures after you have com-
                   pleted the last lessons in the book on health and
                   agriculture, and add more ideas at that time.


                                *1014j! ....)
                                                        Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                TELLING TIME

                                Lesson Fourteen




Objective:     At the end of this lesson, you should he able to ask
               the time of day and respond to a similar question from
               some one else.  By learning the Additional Material, you
               should be able to use common time phrases.


Translation    You:        What's the time?
of Dialogue:
               Ahmad:      It's ten thirty.
               You:        Pardon me?
               Ahmad:      Ten thirty.
               You:        Thank you.       Goodbye.
               Ahmad:      Goodbye.



Activities:    1.     Learn the first and second lines by heart.
               2.     Choose appropriate answers to the question "What
                      time is it?" from the Additional Material in this
                      lesson.


Suggestions    1.     Find out what times of the day most shops and mar-
for Use:              kets are open.
               2.     Notice what time the five daily prayers occur. Do
                      you think they will remain at the same "watch time"
                      all year round?




                                    *102*




                                                  123Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON FOURTEEN
                                                          :;) \     ())} :}%


                                 C                                                l




                  0411       bl..,\                1 p,

                                             ,..




                         .   .           124
                                     *103*                Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                                       LESSON FOURTEEN
                  ')



                      --=.A-' I'          }-\r''                            L:-.1/4- 1 k




         .
      ,..)e--)            0_ j.-1)s      cs Lk-42




        ..-   .

                         Zi.2..,,,,...   (.1 .,k.9



                                         .,
%.,

                  1       ,
                         L.>
                                          IF,                              c_........1-1 I




                               ,..,

                          40J \       61,1     ,...5




                         *104*           125           Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON FOURTEEN                                           TELLING TIME




BASIC MATERIAL:       Dialogue for memorization:
      /inta/          /shinhu il-wagt?/
      /ahmad/         /ha: dhi Cashra wa nuss/
      /inta/          /nacam?/
      /ahmad/         /ha: dhi Cashra wa nuss/
      /inta/          /shukran. vi aman illa:h/
      /ahmad/         /vi aman illa:h/




 Notes on the Dialogue:
 1.     Another way to ask the time is /esmin wagt/. You may hear
        this in certain parts of the country.
 2.     Note the use of the feminine form /ha:dhi/ when used with a
        clock time.
 3.     /na cam/ is one of many ways to ask someone to repeat what
        they said.
 4.     /vi aman illa:h/ is another Standard Arabic leave-taking.




                                                   126
                                    *105*
                                                          Hosted for free on livelingua.com
TELLING TIME                                        LESSON FOURTEEN




ADDITIONAL MATERIAL:       Hours of the clock.
    Learn these special forms referring to "clock time":

    /is-sa:ca wa:hida/             1:00            -0 AR %
                                                              ,       BS L14)) k



    /is-sa:ca thintayn/            2:00                L51.-..k;       2.k.s1A+J'




    /is-sa:ca thala:tha/           3:00                 .4;,4.,.,
                                                               '..     "c\sl.;41) \


   /is-sa:ca arbaca/              4:00              lt..ed, 1        r:IS t;:++)k



   /is-sa:c a khamsa/             5:00              Ttc:f)            7ts UAL)... \



                                                            ..,
   /is-sa:ca sitta/               6:00                   -ct...,p     It.st.:L3


   /is-sa:ca sabaca/              7:00                Zi.IL....-     Et.sUL3) %



   /is ,sa:ca thamamiya/          8:00                 Zt:AL L;      'U 1;4) \


   /is-sa:ca tioaca/              9:00
                                                       -710..34.h;   Zt-s L:::,IA




                                *105*                  Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON FOURTEEN                                            TELLING TIME




       /is-sa:ca Cashra/             10:00                                  l..c-i)*i




       /is-sa:c a hid cash/          11:00
                                                             -'"        :=N.a:...i' t



       /is-sa:ca ithnacash/          12:00




 Notes on the Additenal Material:
  1.     Note the special form of "two" /thintayn/ used in "two o'clock".
  2.     /is-sa:c/ means "hour".
  3.     /wa:hida/ is used because /is-sa: c a/ is feminine.



Other important time expressions:

       quarter                       /rubac/
                                                                            t,
       third                         /thulth/                               (......4.'31"




       half                          /nuss/


       less (2)                      /ilia/
                                     /gas/


       approximately                 /tagri:ban/

                                    *107*     128           Hosted for free on livelingua.com
TIME RELATED VOCABULARY                        LESSON FOURTEEN




ADDITIONAL MATERIAL:     Time & Duration.
   late                /muta:?khar/

   early               lbilcajila/

   second              /tha:nia/

   minute              /dagi:ga/

   minutes             /dga:ig/

   hour                /is-sa:c a/

   hours               /sa:ca:t/

   date                /ta:ri:kh/

   day                 /yawm/


   days                /iya:m/

   week                /isbu:c/

   weeks               /isa:bi:c/

   two weeks           /isbu:cayn/

   month               /shahr/

                                  *108*
                                                   Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                            1.21
LESSON FOURTEEN                                               TIME VOCABULARY




    months                   /shuhu:r/
    year                     /ca:mi

    years                    /cama:n/
    2 years                  /cami:n/
    yesterday                /ya:mis/
    toc:ay                   /il-yawm/

    tomorrow                 /is-subh/
    day after tomorrow       /in-niha : r illi
                              ma:hu is-subh/                                           l

    last week                /il-isbu :c it -fa : yit/

    next week (2)            Al- isbu : c it -ja : y/
                             /il-isbu:c il-muqbil/
    last month               /ish-shahr il-fa:yit/
    next month (2)           /ish-shahr il-ja:y/
                             /ish-shahr il-muqbil/
    last year                /il-ca :m il-fa : yit/
    next year (2)            /il- ca :m it -ja : y/
                                                                 Qs & 1 C lsz) l
                            /ll-ca:m il-muqbll/                   3-J1A ciAtik


 Note:
                                                                                      ]
 The cultural note on the following page contains an important Arab'c
 proverb. For additional proverbs see Appendix in this Handbook
                                                                                           1




                                 *109*                  130       Hosted for free on livelingua.com
TIME
UNDERSTANDING TIME IN THE ARAB WORLD                  LESSON FOURTEEN




 Cultural Note:
 In the Arab world, the concepts of time and space are not viewed
 with such awe as in other cultures. Things take place on a human
 level; people are more important than events. A common Arabic
 proverb says:
       Haste is from the Devil.
       /il-cajla min ish-shayta:n/
                                                6 `-14\          -0, i,1,,s61
 Punctuality is not as important in the Arab world as it is for us in
 the West. The philosophy governing appointments is that implied in
 the expression:
       God willing.
                                                          4
       /in sha' alla:h/                                 ck.)31    ,V.,:, 3k,
 If God wills that the appointment be kept, it will be kept. If God
 doesn't, it won't, and there is nothing that can be done and no
 reason to be upset. It was simply not fated to happen. This can
 be very frustrating for Westerners, who have just as mystical an
 attachment to a rational, ordered and controllable time frame as the
 Arabs do to the idea that nothing is for certain. What is at con-
 flict here is not just respect for time, but a more profound dif-
 ference in perception of time. So when people say to you that they
 will meet you at six o'clock, God willing, it does not mean neces-
 sarily that they will not be there, but the possibility exists. You
 should not complain if they are twenty minutes late. Always bear
 in mind that things which we hold sacrosanct in our own culture
 are not always regarded in the same light or considered as im-
 portant in other cultures. If you in turn should be late and ready
 to apologize profusely, the first thing you are likely to hear is
       "it doesn't matter"
             or                   /la ba : s/
       "never mind"




                                     *110*      131
                                                      Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON FOURTEEN
                                           TIME




                             132
                  ''I: : 7
                                   Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                           FUTURE APPOINTMENTS
                                   Lesson Fifteen




Oujective     At the end of this lesson you should be able to use the
              tuture tense to make an appointment to see someone.



-I Dialogue                       i.aolairie Ba here7
                            N:. she :sn't in now              She's at the embassy.
                            When         she come back?
                                     3              willing
              p             0.K       Te:i her 111 come to see her at 5:00.
                  ' "al     6 .1 willing.     Goodbye


                     Mettrize the                   making appropriate change.
                     Vary :he questitns and replies ac.c2,rding to your own
                     -:.--ciessionn or situational needs       .




                                   agencies and it-,artmen: Anefs with whom
                           may          deal:hge in your work frequently are
                                     the::'             Use this     dialogue or a
                     strriiar            ind:oate y:ur intent:n to return at




                                                          133 Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON FIFTEEN




                 b.)   sL   (t-k-                                        ;




                               134
                   *113*
                                     Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                                 LESSON FIFTEEN




                             1...>      k ,Vor




       'Lk\ st,; ,:)   9.") ,G


c./
         - .) :'".")
      `71-'t';;   c        cat .st.,;
                                                                       OM.




                                        13F,)
                   *114*                         Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON FIFTEEN
                                                    FUTURE APPOINTMENTS




BASIC MATERIAL:       Dialogue for Memorization.
      /bag/                 /mada:m ba:' hu:n?/
      /mu'adhdhaf/          /abda, ma:hi hu:n dhark/
                            hiya vi s-siva:ra/
      /bag/                 /aynta lahi tirjac?/
      /mu'adhdhaf/          /is-sa: ca thala:tha in sha.' alla:h/
      /bag/                 /aywa. gu :1 it -ha ana lahi nji
                            nshu:v-ha vi s-sa:ca khamsa/
      /mu'adhdhaf/        /in sha:' alla:h. maca s-sala:ma/
      /bag/               /maca s-sala:ma/



 Notes on Basic Material:
 1.    /dhark/ means "now".
2.     /aynta/ means "when". See Grammar Handbook Lesson on In-
       terrogatives.
3.     /lahi/ is used to indicate future tense. See Grammar Hand-
       book Lesson on future    tense.
4.     /gu:1 it -ha/ means literally "tell to her".
       book lesson on Indirect Objects for use ofSee   Grammar Hand-
                                                    /li/ I. suffix pro-
       nouns.



Cultural Note:
"N'shallah" (if God willed or God willing) is a formula employed by
Muslims following any reference to the future or to projected plans.
This "N'shallah" is often interpreted by Westerners as expressive of
Arab fatalism, but might just as well be explained as a humility in
the face of the limitations of man's capabilities.

                                   *135*
                                                   136              Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                              DAILY ACTIVITIES
                                Lessor. Sixteen




Objective:        At the end of this lesson you should be able to describe
                  your daily activities using adverbs of frequency.


Translation of
Basic Material:        Vocabulary:
                       What do you do every day?
                            ! get up                   1)     usually
                            I wash                     2)     sometimes
                            I dress                    3)     always
                            I drink tea                4)     never
                            I eat breakfast            5)     next, then
                            I walk                     7)     about, almost
                            I go to work

                       Vocabulary in context: Narrative.
                            I usually get up at 7:00.
                            Then I wash and dress.
                            I always drink tea.
                            Sometimes I eat breakfast in the restaurant.
                            I walk to work about 8:00.
                            I go to the office.
                            I walk to the hospital.


Act:vities:       1.   Pi actice and learn the sentences describing morning
(Ccnt'don              activities above. Tell the rest of your class in a
page 120)              "narrative" using time expressions, your own morning
                       activities. Vary times of the day and activities where
                       appropriate.




                                       ,'116*




                                                  137 Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON SIXTEEN
                                                               _.;;A-g-    cr. -)L.:3)\ Ly), ;11


                                                                           L,,:,         ).           j .A.e.-......)


                          ,
                          -0 -) 1.5.


                   J                  J
                 0...."          0.d...

                          0       .
                              ....e t ..)




 J1.) L   Ls

                                                                                                        &
                                                                                                          .5--')".'




                                                                                                                        :

                                                                   z--L..t.....)A        ,.,i6          1-c)   . t.
                                                                             ...1
                                                                                     .
                                                 ..).'";t-' _,,,                              .31;)            \
                                                                                                                   4.1
                                                               'L.1' i                                             r,
                                                                                    C.3 V;k

                                                                                                 .,
                                                                                              --_,...
                                                                                                               -0..,..
                                                                                                                  -

                                                 4".!-45   R.,.., I1           -eLIA:0)%
                                                                                                  cy--'-)




                                             *117*
                                                                                              Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                      i ,.
_ilk   c.r -' ''''   cr i   :A.3)
                                                                     LESSON SIXTEEN


                                             ( o ...) IS
                                                 to


                                                                  .Y01 J-kielA




                                                                     -4.i:ita.:0 t




                                                            Lej _)
                                                                      C.0 t; \ `7-_.)-z-'l


                                                                                  tr,    6...r.
                                                                         .4
                                     .. ..                                                 .. i
                            L.A-J ...)-Q-'            1.4-=.) \   A.A.irio* A        cytta-,

                                                                              A
                                                                                     L,`s14
                                                            4-4) 1 Lp ci.L.A1

                        *118*                                        Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                                                  13b
LESSON SIXTEEN                                         DAILY ACTIVITIES




BASIC MATERIAL:
    Vocabulary.
    /shtcaddal kul nha:r ca:datan?/
         /nigu:m/                     /ca:datan/
         /nitghussal/                 /marra marra/
         /niclibis/                   /da':iman/
         /nishrub atay/               /abadan/
         /nisutbah/                   /ura dh :k/. /ca :gib dha:k/
         /nimshi/                     /tagri: ban/
         /nigi s ish-shughla/


    Vocabulary in context:     NaLrative for Memorization.

    / c a:datan nigu:m is-saba c a/
    /ura dha:k nitghussal wa nitlibis/
    /nishrub atay da':iman/
    /marra marra nisutbah vi il-matcam/
    /nigi: s ish-shughla ith-thama:niya tagri: ban/
    /nigi: s il-maktab/
    /nimshi ila-t-tab/




                                                     140
                                                               Hosted for free on livelingua.com
 DAILY ACTIVITIES                                      LESSON SIXTEEN




Activities (cont'd from page 116):
               2.   Choose the name of a third person (Ahmed,
                    Fatimatu, etc.) and make up a fictionalized
                    account of his/her morning activities. Learn
                    new vocabulary from your teacher where necessary.
               3.   Translate the following questions into Arabic and
                    ask each other about daily routines:
                    When do you get up?
                    What do you do after you get up?
                    Do you make tea or coffee?
                    Do you always eat breakfast?
                    When do you go to work?
                    How do you go to work?
              4.    Use the pictures on the next page to practice furth-
                    er questions and responses.


Suggestions   1.    Since these are what might be called "personal
for Use:            information questions", caution might be advised
                    in making "random surveys" using questions like
                    these. These are the kinds of questions, however,
                    which persons involved in health projects often
                    have to ask regarding health and nutrition.
              2.    Make up simple step-by-step accounts of other daily
                    activities. Learn from your teacher how to say
                    activities which seem important.




                                 *120*
                                                   14i   Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON SIXTEEN                 DAILY ACTIVITIES




                                                                          i




                                                 4-
                                                     MI.




                 *121*   142          Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                         DESCRIBING OBSERVATIONS
                              Lesson Seventeen




Objective:    At the end of this lesson, you will be able to describe
              what you see in a typical street scene, based on the
              illustration contained here, as well as your imagination
              and intuition.


Translation   New Vocabulary :
of Basic
Material:     picture                      he is carrying
              man                          he is wearing
              men                          he is buying
              woman                        bou-bou
              women                        turban
              sky                          sandals
              blue/green                   trousers
              white                        shirt
              clothes                      small
              a lot of                     large/big
                                           malahfa
              Model sentences:
              1.      The man on the left is wearing a bou-bou.
              2.      The man on the right is wearing a bou - bou ,
                      sandals and a turban.
              3.      The woman is wearing a malahfa.
              4.    There are a lot of people in the market.


                                   *122*


                                                             Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                                       143
LESSON SEVENTEEN
                                                    -30)               -;)k




               113   )   0>44..)) (1,54       cAs                %




                         (."1      C-u-) A" Cilj 3-1)9
                                             )-P      (k

                           *123*
                                                           Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                       144
Et L.:Ail      a. _;.:J                                     LESSON SEVENTEEN




                                                                             4. i.04::

            caj k., .)
                          0-!)) c.stJR"             Aa!    csis J-p. i")%
        kr \   .)        , u..... -v
                         %-.0   .      cf .....h.ti ,..%                                 2

                                                   cS1 )-P       , dtk-r1;
                                              -L.45-141    7:%...,ff y ,,1i


                                                                  Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                    *124*
                                                           145
LESSON SEVENTEEN
                                                 DESCRIBING OBSERVATIONS



Basic Material:
     New Vocabulary.
             /su:ra/                                /ha:mal/.

             /ra:jil/                               /la ;bas/

             /rijja:l/                              /sha : ri/

             /mara:/
                                                   /dira:ca/
            /iclya:t/                              /hawli/

            /sima.s/                               /na-a : yil/

         /akhdhar/                                 /sirwa:1/

         /abyadh/                                  /tirki/
        /liba: s/
                                                   /isghi:r/
        /ya: sir min/
                                                  /ikbi:r/

                                                  /malahfa/

  Model sentences:
        1.      /ir-ra:jil cala i:d it -carbi la: bas dira:ca/
        2.      /ir-rajil cala i:d il-yasri la :bas dira:ca
                wa na a:yil wa hawli/                                                                 1
                                                                                                      1




                                                                                                      1


       3.       /il-mara: la:bsa il-malahfa/                                                          1




       4.       /kha:lig ya:sir min in-na :s vi-l-marsa/                                              1




                                                       146
                                    *125*
                                                                  Hosted for free on livelingua.com
DESCRIBING OBSERVATIONS                                 LESSON SEVENTEEN




Activities:    1.    Learn the words in the vocabulary list accompany-
                     ing the illustration. Be able to describe features in
                     the illustration to your classmates. Prepare a 20-30
                     second narrative description which you will deliver
                     to the group.
               2.   Make    a   "chain description"     of this or         another
                     illustration, with each person contributing one sen-
                     tence describing something in the picture.


Suggestions    1.   Bring in one of your own photographs and describe
for Use:            it while showing it to your classmates.
               2.   Study a photograph for 2 minutes, and then give it
                    to someone else while you try to remember and say
                    everything that was in the picture.


 Notes on the Basic Material:
 1.    /iclya:t/, "women", is considerably different from the singular,
       /mara/. See Grammar Handbook for more information on plurals.
 2.    /ya:sir min/ literally means "a lot from".
 3.    Note that in the vocabulary listed here, the verbs are in-
       troduced in the masculine participle form. See Grammar Hand-
       book for further information on the use of participles.




                                  *126*
                                                      147 Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON SEVENTEEN




                                   J




ik




                    )



                                            __
                                                  ,


            a                1""       ft   / .
                        ti




     . C'



                \




                                                      148
                                                      Hosted for free on livelingua.com
    DESCRIBING OBSERVATIONS
                                                          LESSON SEVENTEEN




   SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL:
   Suggested Activities:
   1.    Using the vocabulary you have learned in the first part of Lesson
         17,    try to describe what you see in the illustration which ac-
        companies this Supplement.    Make up connected sentences which
        might tell    a kind of story of this scene   You could begin by
        learning the names for the vegetables and wares   which the woman
        is selling. The following words may be useful to you:
        sit                       /yig cid!,

        stand                     i'yu:git,

        ask                       /yisuwwal/
                                                          J;
        look for                      ylawwad/


.,L..
        Using the verb paradigms you have learned before, make correct
        sentences using the verbs in the list above. Memorize the ad-
        jectives in the list which follows. Make sentences which your
        teacher can verify for accuracy.




                                                 1 4 ;)
                              *128*                            Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                   r   -
                               1




 Ar-
       ,,.      _
                           g



     t
  'IL:r4114
       No.           L

alr4I
   F-41W-1-
              111111dArl
ftemenimmis




   42,0
   "iklAil



                                           Hosted for free on livelingua.com
DESCRIBING OBSERVATIONS:
ADJECTIVES                                                            LESSON SEVENTEEN




ADDITIONAL MATERIAL:                  Colors.        See Grammar Handbook for informa-
Fitn on Adjective Gender

    red        111)                 ahmar
           0.\                      11,...nara
           Cpl`                     hamar


    green blue on)                 akhdhar
                             f)    khadhara
                          WI'      khudhar


   ye!:cw on`                      asfar
               f`                  salara
               cd.\                safar

                                                                                           s
   ::::k \::` ,m)                  akhal                            aswa:d/..).5.-.0' I
                      -           kahala                        ;   sawada, .s I
                                                                                0..9.-4-4,
                      pl.)         kahal.                           sawad/ -___51--m-'


  wh:te ,:n)                      abyadh
          \,                      .baydha
          .21'                    bayadh




                                             1:30*            151         Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON SEVENTEEN




bro%.n (in)

       (f)
                       adkhan
                       ciakhana,
                                                                          ui
       (p1)            dakhan



                             ._ ..
                                 .
              t t ItZVF-;*
               .                      ..A-


              1LL.
                i Ilk, *".
                        i :Tii.1
                               4.1
                                                .




                             Pilgrims at Mecca encircle the Ka'ba




 Cu:tural Nct
 You may 1...nd that .t_er-ption of c.,:ior quality in :\lauritania may differ
 from ours A:: ta.-.:s an,1 =reent,         bt- akhdhar, and many yellows;
 :ranzes and br.wn win ip1v 1            ahmar




                                                                    152
                                                                          Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                          HOSPITALITY AND COURTESY
                                  Lesson Eighteen




Objective:        By the end of this lesson, you should be able to extend
                  greetings to someone's family and to deal with traditional
                  conventions of Arab courtesy and hospitality.


Basic Material:
                  PCV:        Hello, Brahim.    How are you?          Will you see
                              Mohammed today?
                  Ibrahim: Yes, I am going to his house tonight.
                  PCV:        (Could you) take this letter and give it to him
                              when ycu see him?
                  Ibrahim: O.K.
                  PCV:        And s     hello to his family for me.
                  Ibrahim: God willing.

Activities:       1.     Memorize the dialogue with the help of your teacher
                         or a friend.
                  2.     Take turns acting out the dialogue with different
                         classmates.
                  3.     Vary the names and gender of the dialogue where
                         appropriate.


Suggestions       1.     Study the Cultural Note in this Lesson for clues to
for Use:                 how your Arab friends view such courtesies as ex-
                         tended greetings. Decide who you should remember
                         to send greetings to in similar circumstances.




                                        *132*

                                                    1 Jr U
                                                             Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON EIGHTEEN




           (.   f-%:-4 i L          ps".".          1,         i'%1-$;
                  c
                      ()-_"


                  J I .)    crt:CLA         L5    Si     - cLA--c.9
                                                                                     r9
                                                                                              k




                              .1
                            Ls-"' .02 Iji?               u.e...4.3 1                                              1




                                            cl1        :3 1--k




                                        ,
                       .4      !
                              cc,,.,.             is             .4

                                                                 -k-x-,   )      L"5'e---IJ



                                        cw         _r   i.,:




                                   *133*           154                        Hosted for free on livelingua.com
GA                                   LESSON EIGHTEEN
     0.'").,j1k




                   L_s




                         cis   (cL   )




                  =4134*         155 Hosted for free on livelingua.com
    LESSON EIGHTEEN                                     1-1-)SPITALITY AND COURTESY




    BASIC MATERIAL:              Dialogue for Memorization.
          /mutatawwic /                   /ahlan ya bra:hi:m ya:k il-khayr?
                                          lahi tshu:v muhammad il-yawm?/
          /brah:hi:m/                -    /ahi:h laiti agi:s da:r-u il-layla ha:dhi/
          /mutatawwic        /            /igbadh it -bra :wa ha:dhi wa cati:ha-l-u
                                          aynta tshu:v-u./
          /brah:hi:m/                     /tayyib./
          /mutatawwic /                   /wa sallim cala usrat-u min-nil
          / brah : hi : m/                /in sha:' allah/


     Notes on Basic Material:
     1.     /ya/ here s a vocative, used when calling to someone.
     2.     /lahi/ is used to indicate future tense. See Grammar Hand-
            book lesson on Future Tense
1    3.     /ngi:s/ means to go somewhere and does not take the preposi-
            tion Ili/ or /shu:r/ as would inimshi/.
     4.     /igbadh/ is the imperative of the verb "take". For a woman it
            would be /igbadhi/.
     5.     / ati:ha-l-u/ shows the use of the Indirect Object. See Gram-
            mar Handbook for further reference.
     6.     / t ayyib/ is an alternative word used to mean "O.K." or "all
            right".
     7.     /wa sallim cala us,at-u min-nil means literally "and greet on
            his family from me".



     Cultural Note:
     It is considered important to extend your personal greetings to
     families whom you have met, even if only briefly. If you are in-
     vited to a Mauritanian home for a meal, you are not expected to
     bring tokens or presents for your hosts, or to contribute anything
     to the meal. Expect to spend a long time before, during and after a
     meal. and to be exhorted to eat copious amounts of everything.
     Your hosts will pride themselves on the hospitality they are ex-
     tending. and attention will be paid to the enthusiasm which you
     bring to the consumption of food. This is traditional Arab hos-
     pitality at its best, and can be one of the most satisfying aspects
     to your stay in Mauritania.
                                               ,
                                           /       _
                                               '*13o*         .156          Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                                       t



                                                                                                        ,1,1,111,1Plitill1111111,1111ffilir       14
                                                                                                                                                  I;
                                                                                                    I




                                                                                                                                                       I



                                                                                                                                                                 !        1:,




                                                                                             ,




                                                                                                                                             I;
                                                                                                                                                                                         IIlil
                                                                                                                                             1111,1.

                                                                                                                                                       III           !!        !li
                                                                                                                                        111N.1.11
                                                                               411111

                                                                "1411111II
                                                       1    ,,
                                                      .e a, i 11111 I                   1




                                                                                                                         114
                                                                                                                                                                                          I        ifi1111.11.101iti'l'.
                                      Te  t        o., to
                                                           IL                                                                                                                                 i          lirM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ill
                                          : ), !" A 4,1
                                      ,'p:
                                        ,,,in ,;                  '
                                                                                                                               An a.
         '                1f'.4 &t, It 1.1                                 1    11,,',                                         ( WO

'    !       1"11         Illii
                                                                                  o
                                                                                                                                  11
                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                   t, 11111',                        I            111ii
          4..1)41
             t                                                                 i 1.3.
                                                                                 m.i..
                                                                                                                                '111111111.
                                                                                                                                                                                                          f

                                                                                      .1.4.,,,,,,
    .,.t,i;..111v,i                                                                                                                                                                       I d111111 1111111111              1


    .: , f.311,11,;,,
                 .,                                                                                                            rt11"11111111111                  III's;                                               11
                                                                                                                                    filIp11111111.
        1 Jlt,I, ..;;;-... t..i.                                                                                                       ll'n 1111           II              1
                                                                                                                                                                                                  11
                                                                                                                                                                                                           1 IC.
                 1 ,'1 17,Fri.r; t ,l',                                          .,
                                                                                                                                             !nil           If
                                                                                                                                                                                                               .1

                      t
                                                                                                                                             '11111111Anii
                      1,,....;;".
                           ,I;    ,
                                                                      .,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           III


                                                                                                                                             h(1111iill 11111111
                              ,                                                                                                          "
                                                                                                                                              1             I
                                                                                                                                                                               Mk,
                                                                                                                                                                          'II I It
                                                                                                                                                                                              'III,',



                                                                                                                                                                                     Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                               LEARNING ABOUT ISLAM
                                    Lesson Nineteen




    Objective:        At the end of this lesson, you should be able to name
                      the most important moral duties of a person professing
                      the Islamic faith. You should also be able to describe
                      the traditions surrounding the month of Ramadan. and
                      name the important Islamic holidays during the year.



     ICultural Note
     "The most important of the ritual and moral duties incumbent on all
     Muslims are prayer. almsgiving. fasting and pilgraTage. Custom
     and tradition have supplied the gaps which the Qur an leaves and
     have welded its prescriptions into a well-defined system, based
     theoretically "n the practice of the Prophet himself. For the broad
     outlines doubtless ths Prophet's example was faithfully recorded and
     adopted.    The Qur an appears to require only three prayers a
                 .


     day. but the tradition insists on five: the first begins at sunset,
     and is followed by the night, dawn. noon and mid-afternoon prayers.
     The faithful are called to prayer by the muadhdhin, who.. cries with
     a powerful and penetrating voice: 'God is most great. I testify
     that there is no God but God. I testify that Muhammed is God's
     apostle. Come to prayer, come to security. God is great.' Each
1    clause is repeated at least once and the morning call reminds
1
     Muslims that 'prayer is better than sleep.'"
                                    Islam, A Guillaume, p. 66.




Ramadan:             The month of tiastiLKI
                     Ramadan                  ramada:n       6 I.,.._,A
Unlike man: of our festi' als and holidays which are governed by a
solar calendar and fall on a definite date each year, Muslim festivals,
governed be a lunar calendar, advance by approximately 10 days each
year. So. if Ramadan begins on August 1 in 19'78. it
begin on July 21 in 1979. and so on, taking 33 years towill   probably
                                                           complete a
cycle.

                                        *137*


                                               'f   158             Hosted for free on livelingua.com
 LEARNING ABOUT ISLAM
                                                        LESSON NINETEEN




  The Qurcan expressly orders that the fast continue throughout the
  month of Ramadan. Fasting can be a very great strain, especially when
  it falls in the summer months when temperatures
 be coped with. The fast begins before dawn ofover the
                                                       100 degrees must
                                                       day  after the new
 moon of the month of Ramadan appears. Each country has its own moon
 viewers who, on sighting the new moon, telephone or telegraph the
 news so that the beginning of the fast can be broadcast nationally. In
 some countries the news is announced by the firing of a cannon.
 Fasting means abstaining from all food and drink, smoking and sexual
 intercourse from that moment in the early morning when it is possible to
 distinguish a black thread from a white thread. It continues through
 the hours of daylight until the sun sinks below
 cannons are also used to announce the end of each the horizon. Often,
                                                    day's fast.
 Certain people are exempt from fasting; the sick, pregnant women,
 young children and travellers. Travellers and the sick and pregnant,
 too are expected to fast an equal number of days later, at their con-
 venience.
The rhythm of the days is slower in Ramadan; daytime activity is kept
to a minimum. Some shops may close and ministries and offices
shorter hours. People often sleep through the long afternoons. How-work
ever, after the cannon goes off to mark the end of the day's fasting, a
meal breaks the fast and people take to the streets and markets,
friends and relatives, and, for a month, evenings and nights arevisit
                                                                    as
active as the normal daytime. After dinner many people stay up all
night, maybe taking a second meal before the dawn call-to-prayer.
The time spent waiting for the beginning of the next day's fasting
is called the /sahu:r/.
The meal at sunset is called


Often special foods and delicacies prepared during Ramadan are served...
In Mauritania, dates and milk are in abundance.
The end of Ramadan is celebrated by a holiday known as:
               /ci:d it -fitr/
                     or
               / c.1:d is-saghi:r/
This holiday usually lasts for three days. It is customary to wear new
clothes (or one's best) for this / i:d/, and visit friends and relatives,
and to give alms to the poor.
                                                          Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                     *138'     1 5 i)
LESSON NINETEEN                                                  LEARNING ABOUT ISLAM




Hajj-- The Pilgrimage:
The second major event in the Muslim year is:
                 /il-hajj/
                                              ek
The Hajj is the twelfth month of the Muslim calendar. It is incumbant
on every Muslim to try to make the pilgrimage. to Mecca at least once
in his/her lifetime, and today, with modern means of transportation,
more than a million Muslims of all nationalities make the pilgrimage an-
nually.
The feast, or holiday, on the tenth day of the month of Hajj is called:
     Feast of the                     /c 1:id it -adtia/                   L.,--%0 )) 1 14IX.
     Sacrifice                              or
                                      /ci: d it -kabi : r/                   }-,...6    ..A.AS

The name of this feast relates to the custom of killing and eating a
sheep to celebra..a the end of the Pilgrimage.
of Islam, Llid is derived from the feast of theThis
                                                    is the central 'east
                                                Atonement, Abraham's
substitute sacrifice.


Feast and Holiday Greetings:
Various greetings can be used before and during holidays and feasts:
     Happy holiday!           /ci: d muba : rak/                                              ...     Lk..
     (lit. "blessed
       holiday!")
     (variations)             /ci: d-ak muba : rak/                                        t        I'''. )
                                                                                                             /

                              / c.1:d muba:rak calayk/                         _..LtS        S., L.L.. .mss




                        The Prophet's mission: "A mercy for all mankind"


                                          *139*                                        Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                                               180
LEARNING ABOUT ISLAM                                       LESSON NINETEEN




New Year:
Both the Muslims and the Christians refer to the beginning of a year as
the "New Year". The Arabic equivalent for "New Year" is:
    New Year                  /ra:s is-sana/               :=k3-:-Na O   cy)
    (lit. "head
    of the year")

Common New Year greetings are:
    Happy New Year!
    /kull sana wa intum bi-khayr/            J,Je

    /kull sana wa intum tayyibi:n/         ,51,2,21 eu,

    /kull ca:m wa intum bi-khayr/

SUPPLEMENTARY RELIGIOUS VOCE' BULARY:
    religion            /di: n/
    God                /alla:h/
    prophet            /nabi/
                       /rasu :1/

    Islam

    prayer             /sala:a/
    he prays/                                          0
      is praying       iisallii
                                                    ...$4-'11
   Quran               /quea: ni                     3 1_,
   alms                Al-zaka:/                     , Lyt
   pillars             /qu:a:cid/                   As I);

                                   *140*              161 Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON NINETEEN                                                                                 LEARNING ABOUT ISLAM




    church                                            /kani:sa/
    Christian                                         /nasra : nil                                                         1
                                                                                                                           -Y%4)
    Christians
        (lit: "Nazarenes"
                                                      /nasa:ral                                                        , LQj
                                                a term applied by extension to all Europeans)
   Muslim                                             /muslim/

   Muslims
                                                     /muslimi:n/
   prayer caller                                     /adha:n/
   he fasts/is fasting                               li_su:m/                                                              1-.4)



The /ash-shhada/ is the declaration or affirmation of faith for Mus-
lims:
                   c1/4.m                                         ) can yi
/ashhadu ann la ila:h ilia alla:h wa Mu h ammad                                                                        rasu :1 alla:h/.
                                          /TN

          A


          :1
                            , i-
         if i               (7-1
                            PJ I I
                                  I



        ..)CL               1     I;
                                f Ii

                                                                                                T            1i
                                                                                                                                   A
               :
                                                                                                       I    'I" j
                                                            el.     I                ...L         "
                                                                                                 1,4   j    kt   4'.               I. !   1 4.


                                                                                                           .-4 ''' i           i




         14"                              ,s t. ,,,....,,,,..4.-.
                                                      .             ....,
                                                                            I
                                                                  ,,,,,....i.   r.   L-f....i   -1 0 tcLi
                                                                                                                                          1
         1;,/,:i i'Lla i               s.::    .L... "i;'t.'.1ur, . -,,, ) k."..'.., .11-1
         ..,..........c...................................                                                             w

                                                                                                                                           Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                                         *141*
                   TALFING ABOUT RELIGION IN THE U.S.

                                  Lesson Twenty



 Objective         At the end of this lesson you should be able to answer
                   some of the questions which a Muslim might have about
                   religion in the 1.7.S

Translation
of Basic
Material:          A:   Are there Muslims in America?
               B:       Yes, there are. but most people are Christians.
               A:       Do you pray?
               B:       Some people do.      I pray every Sunday at church.
              A:        Do you fast in Ramadhan?
              B:        We don't have Ramadhan.
              A:        Have you read the Quran?
              B:        Yes. but in English.

Activities.   1.        Memorize the dialogue and adapt it with appropriate
                        responses for your own experience.
              .1
                        Review the religion terminology in Lesson Fourteen
                        and learn appropriate questions about holidays,
                        belief s and practices in Mauritania.




                                     *142*



                                                              Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON TWENTY




                                 LC_,'            s         :_51.ck             6-!IL) CI?                           1




     L...s i t't''---'   cib' CA-A    L-4.-c 1        /1-         j_5113 6.:;.    9.AP I




                                                                  "
                                                                .k.p.....        ,..,.;_..                       1




     A.3 %
                ( .). (YI                 L;1112-; 6 1
                                                                  cf (;) k OP--irj.


                                e
                                      vii LS                                                                 i




                                     u -."5       u I-t                 jo u) L
                                      C           I
                                      .    (. }-),           3 1.), --i-) _                              t




                                     c?     ..t..' ))1., ;L                 .     q....tp9 1          C./


                                          *143*                                       Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                                      164
                                               LESSON TWENTY




        C
                      J
<..f,                  j,k                 ,-14p




                              ;14).)     (.,...).z;




            01'64                t;)4%




                                                ci




                    1.e          _Y-Ye--;



                ALs
                                   3s)




                                                      Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                      *144*            165
LESSON TWENTY                   TALKING ABOUT RELIGION IN THE U.S.




BASIC MATERIAL:
      A:   /kha:ligi:n muslimi:n vi amri:ka?/
      B:   /ahi:h kha:ligi:n, yaghi:r aghlab in-na:s nasa:ra/
      A:   /intu:ma tsallu?/
      B:   /bacdh in-na:s, ana n sali kul yawm it -had vi 1-kani:sa/
      A:   /wa tsu:mu vi ramada:n?/
      B:   /ma kha:lig ramada:n cand-na/
      A:   /grai:t il-qur'a:n il-kari:m?/
      B:   /abi:h yaghi:r bi-l-ingli:zia/



 Notes on the Basic Material:
 1.    /aghlab/ means "majority", or "most of". This is a superlative
       form.   See Grammar Handbook for further information on com-
       paratives and superlatives.

 2.    /nasa : ra/ a word of Middle Eastern origin, designating the
       Nazarenes, the disciples of Jesus of Nazareth, and by ex-
       tension, Christians or Europeans in general. More popularly,
       it refers to all Europeans or non-Muslims, with no religious
       connotation. It is sometimes a pejorative term like /tuba:b/,
       *.o be avoided.
 3.    /tsallu/ - "you (all) pray?"
4.     /bacdh in-na:s/ means "some of the people". /bacdh al-waqt/
       means "some of the time".
5.     /1-kani:sa/, "the church"
6.     /tsu:mu/ - "you fast"
7.     /il-qur'a:n il-kari:m/ means "The Noble Quran".


                                                                Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                   *145*        166
TALKING ABOUT RELIGION                                                     LESSON TWENTY




                                                                  t
ADDITIONAL MATERIAL:                          Religious Vocabulary.
    Jesus       /c .                  : sa/
    Christian                      /masi : hi/
    Mary                           /mariam/
    holy war                       /jiha:d/                  .>




 Cultural Note: #1.
 Try to find out the major differences of ideology between Christian-
 ity and Islam. A good reference book would be A. Guillaume's
 Islam, published by Penguin, Harmsworth, Ltd., London. If you
 are involved in a religious discussion which becomes a little
 "touchy", a good rejoinder that all Muslims accept is /kull-na ahl
 it -kita:b/ - "we are all people of The Book."




     ,I,vlviritudynutaiddiwn)lo,,in
                               I      ,I"



                                                                           Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                                     *146*            16
LESSON TWENTY                TALKWG ABOUT RELIGION IN THE U.S.




 Cultural Note: #2.
 You h ve learned that the Arabic word for "Christian" or "Euro-
 pean" (including North Americans) is /nasra:ni /, which is derived
 from "Nazerenes". Islamic principles dictate respect for the other
 two monotheistic faiths, calling both Christians and Jews "people of
 the book." Jesus Christ is respected as a teacher and an early
 prophet. However, Mohammad is regarded as the last prophet or
 messenger of God's will.
 "Submission" is one of the key tenets of Islam and devout Muslims
 show a much greater daily involvement in the practices of their
 faith then we might consider usual in the West. Five times a day
 prayer is but one example of this. So don't be surprised if Muslim
 people consider Christianity a bit "soft". Westerners' ability to be
 secular individuals during the week. and church-goers on Sunday
 may seem odd to your Muslim friends.
 In spite of the predominance of religion in daily lives, you will be
 judged in Mauritania not by the outward display of your faith, but
 by the manner in which you treat people. Warmth and equal con-
 sideration for everyone, no matter what their standing, will earn
 you respect and admiration.




                                                             Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                               .*147*
                                             168
                DESCRIBING PAST EVENTS AND ACTIVITIES
                              Lesson Twenty-One




Objective:       At the end of this lesson, you will be able to use the
                 past tense of common verbs in order to describe past
                 events and activities.

Translation      Last Thursday I went to see my friend who lives in
of Narrative:        (place)   . We went by car and arrived at 11:00
                 in the morning. I visited my friend at the clinic.
                 I talked to her director. Later we all had lunch together.
                 We returned to Nouakchott in the evening.
                 New vocabulary:
                      I visited                we returned
                      we arrived               we had lunch
                      I see                    together
                      who (rel.)

Activities:      1.   Memorize the narrative and tell the story to your
                      classmates. Make any changes that P re appropriate
                      with the help of your teacher.
                 2.   Study the verb forms in the special Gram:nar
                      Supplement to this Lesson. Change the narrative
                      by retelling the story about another person. Use
                      "they", "his", etc.

Suggestions      1.   A "narrative" or account of past or recent activities
for Use:              can sometimes be "elicited" in a conversation by
                      asking the simple question:
                      What did you do          yesterday?
                                               last week
                                               in Dakar etc.




                                    *148*

                                                    1 6!)Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON TWENTYONE
                                              6.,_.)--lb'' _, .A-91,1`                                 cri        -.)-0




   LS`'-l" 114          c.___,,'-;.;                             (..S3 LL t               ,...rt       /           .)-!.




                                 L...:.,.,
                  L




                                                           ,..
                                                                                                      'i
            .   [...p J.)._ ...x....                ,_-_-,....u...,       ....,                  c......A.2)%
                                                                                                                  LS




   } .....>-"        1.1-0. ..1 -,           Litt, t)              l,..   ...t
                                                                                  .
                                                                                      ;        S

                                                                                                           . . t,
                                                                                                   .0 },.....)




                                                                                                                 .1 I
                                                .          .




                                              C....34:1- 1-4.                                                        1




                                                                                          17 0
                                                                                                     Hosted for free on livelingua.com
 -AP I'M   0,5      LESSON TWENTY-ONE




                              Y-A`;-4         c.



                    j


Le-t)       (54,1




                        ON.




                                        vJJ

                                            CSk/ k



           *150*
                    171       Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON TWENTY-ONE              DESCRIBING PAST EVENTS AND ACTIVITIES




Narrative for Memorization:
      /yawm il-khami:s il-ma:dhi mishi:t nishuv
      vi (place) . mishi:-na vi wa:ta           sa:hibt-i illictiskun
                                          wa wa?1-na  vi hid ash is-subh.
      zir-na sa:hibt-i vi-t-tab wa takallamt ma a mudi:r-ha.
      tagaddi:na ka:mili:n                                        wra dha: k
                            wa raja na shu:r nua:kshu:t vi-l-masa:/

Vocabulary:
      zirt           rajacna
      wasalna        taghadi: na
      illi           ka:m;li:n



 Notes on Basic Material:
 1.     /ll-ma: dhi/ means "the past". Note the literal translation of
        the expression "last Thursday" - ("day-the-Thursday-the-past")
 2.     imishi:t/ means "I went". See the Grammar Note in this les-
        son for further information on Past Tense. Note the transla-
        tion of "I went to see". /mishayt nishu:v/ ("I went I see").
 3.     /illi/ is the equivalent to the relative "who" in
        friend who works in Nouakchott."                  English, "my
 4.     /vi-l-masa:/ means "in the evening".
5.     Note that the vowel sound ("dipthong") represented in trans-
       literation as /-ay/ (ex./mishayt/) may be pronounced /i:/ or
       /mishi:t/.




                                   *151*
                                                172  Hosted for free on livelingua.com
DESCRIP I'mG PAST EVENTS AND ACTIVITIES               LESSON TWENTY-ONE




SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL:           Grammar Note.
    The past tense in Arabic is formed by adding suffixes to the last
    letter of the "stem" of the verb These suffixes are regular and
                                            .

    constant from one verb to another and indicate the equivalents to
    the English "I" , "you" , "he" , "she" , etc  .


    Here is the verb "speak" in the past tense;
           I spoke              /tkallamt/
           you spoke (m )   .   /tkallamt/
           you spoke (f )       /tkallamti/
           he spoke             /tkallam/
           she spoke            /tkallamat/
           we spoke             /tkallamna/
           you spoke (pl )  .   /tkallamtu/
           they spoke           /tkallamu/

   Verbs which have a /wa : w/ as the middle letter in the present
   tense drop it in the past tense and conform to the pattern shown
   below   .


   Here is the verb "see" :
        I saw                   /shivt/
        you saw (m . )          /shivt/
        you saw (f . )          /shivti/
        he saw                  /sha: v/
        she saw                 /sha : vat/
        we saw                  /shivna/
        you saw (pl )   .       /shivtu/
        they saw                /sha: vu/                          "
   Check with your teachers the other verbs you have encountered that
   follow this pattern. Note that the suffixes indicating the different
   persons never change.
                                   *152*              .1 "
                                                             Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON TWENTY-ONE         DESCRIBING PAST EVENTS AND ACTIVITIES




   Verbs which have /ya : / as the last letter in the present tense
   undergo the slight changes in pronunciation outlined in the
   example show below: Here is the verb "go" or "walk" :
        I went               /mashi: t/                         CL..........A2u.

        you went (m . )     /mashi: t/                           c........1,
        you went (f . )      /mashi: ti/
        he went             /masha/
        she went            /mashat/                                    :,..
       we went              /mashi: na/
        you went (pl. )     /mashi: tu/
       they went            /mashaw/
       (Check with your       teacher what other verbs follow this
       pattern . )
   Note that all verbs which follow the above pattern and those which
   follow the pattern of "see on the previous page will behave it the
   same way as the examples shown here. You must be aware of the
   vowel changes that occur within verbs when comparing them to
   their present tense forms .




                                *153*       1 74     Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                       DESCRIBING YOUR PAST
                            Lesson Twenty-Two




Objective:   At the end of this lesson, you should be able to describe
             your personal history, using appropriate past tense
             verbs. When you learn the Additional Material, you
             should be able to ask appropriate past tense questions.
Basic
Material:    1)   I was born in        (year)   in      (place)        .


             2)   I lived       (place) for     (no.)        years.
             3)   I was a student in
                  a)    high school
                  b)    college/university
                  c)    technical school
             4)   I studied
                  a)    agriculture
                  b)    nursing
                  c)   languages
                  d)   health care
                  e)    education
                  f)   literature
             5)   I came to Mauritania in (year) and I work in
                  a)   the agricultural project in
                  b)   the clinic in
                  c)   the school in
                  d)   the health center in


                                  *154*
                                        1 76    Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                                                                          4
LESSON TWENTY-TWO                                   :         ..)....6 k            Ls.. U.3 1
                                                                                                         Cf.)          -3.,t) 1




                                                                                          _.s.           .-7-L.Q.4.4.




                                                        .5




            ;Li...A,:
                  :...    ck.-...0., ....t,




                                                                                                 ...J....)
                                                                                                             .
                                                                                                                   >         4-




                                                                           c_d 1-) >) %



                         S. k.s.   --e
                                                    ;L.,...,t.t.            _3' 1                    p     ....,            s

           a &1-2 Lk--' '
                  s --143
                                              -1-.-.-)...) -3.-t t
                                   L.
                         LI        `k3%' b k } c

                                              *155*
                                                                             176
                                                                                                 Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                           ..
.   ..06k                  c)
                           ..                  ,       -; 3 \
                                                                                                 LESSON TWENTY-TWO




                                                                     LS                                                             2
                                                                                                    _5


                                                                      3                    ,s -'14-'4'                              3

                  )-3 1)        .1.A..."       ..k-s




                                   .--isr- I-P

            _. ...., ,-,
            ,..)....tL;         ;.1......),-t.,

                                                                                                                                    4




                                                                                                               _
                                                                            _          -.}..)-




                      ..."                 '       2k               >A-"I

                                                       J        1:t..........,   Alt
                                           j           --.t-e--)%
                                                        cv                   'Yc
                                                                *156*
                                                                                                 Ifrifri
                                                                                                    e
                                                                                                        Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON TWENTv-'1WO                                    DESCRIBING YOUR PAST




BASIC MATER:AL:         Recitation for memorization.
     /khalgt vi                vi           /
     /skint vi                  li          /
     /kint taimi:di vi                          /
          a)      /madrasa tha:nawiya/
          b)      /kulliya/
          c)      /ja:mica/
          d)      /madrasa fanniyya/
     /darast                        /
          a)     /iz-zira:ca/
          b)     /it-tibb/
          c)     /il-lugha:t/
          d)     /is-sihha/
          e)     /it-tacli:m/
         f)      /il- 'adab/
     /wa jayt ila mu:ri:ta:niya vi ca:m                ova nishtaghal vi                          ./
         a)      /i1-mashru:c iz-zira:ci vi
         b)      /it-tab vi
         c)      /il- madrasa vi
         d)      /markiz is-sihha vi


Notes on Basic Material:
1)    Refer t(.; the Grammar Handbook lesson on Past Tense for further
      information on these verbs.
2)    /ila/ means "to". /shu:r/ is an alternative form.

                                        *157*
                                                178           Hosted for free on livelingua.com
1)ESCR1B IN G YOUR PAST
                                                             LESSON TWENTY-TWO




Act ivit,t             1   \lake up v.-)tir ow n personal history following the
                           model   in   the Basic Material   .    Learn the Arabic
                           ek u v.11, :ices and "recite" it to a classmate.
                           \ sk 'where .    when" . and 'how long" questions
                             hile a classmate recites his her personal history.
Su g.::;e...; t iens       Bt   asking,    appropriate   questions.   make        up     a
                           biography of your teacher and introduce him/her
                                                         .

                           to another class   .



                           Make up fictitious chracters perhaps using il-
                               tra tiens frem the Handbook. or from your own
                           imagination p c.ictice all the vocabulary in this and
                            ,reviou-, lessens




                                          xl 58x
                                                             17   Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON TWENTY-TWO
                                                DESCRIBING YOUR PAST




ADDITIONAL VOCABULARY:      Subjects on school and college curricula :
    science               /Cilia/


   the sciences           lil-culu : m/

   biology                /biu lujiy a/

   chemistry              /ki .miya/

   physics                /fi: si : ka/

   math                   /hisa : ba : t/

   engineering            /handasa/

   history               /ta : ri : kh/

   geography             /jiu : gra : fiya/

  languages              /lugha : t/

  health                 /is- sihha/

  agriculture            /iz-zira : Ca/

  medicine               lit- tibb/

  education              /it-tacli: m/

  music                  /musi: ga/




                             *159*
                                                       Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                          180
                    WEATHER, CLIMATE 3z SEASONS
                            Lesson Twenty-Three




Objectives:    1    At the end of the basic material, you should be
                    able to     use simple terminology to describe the
                    weather in Mauritania or in the U.S.
               2.   When you learn the Additional Material, you should
                    be able to use some more common adjectives to de-
                    scribe degrees or variations in weather conditions.

Translation
of Basic
Material:           Ray:        It's very hot today. What's the weather
                                lik,:. in the winter?
                    Hassan:     It's not hot like today, there are clouds
                                and dust.
                    Ray:        In my country, there is a big difference
                                betWeen winter and summer.
                    Hassan:     Is it cold?
                    Ray.        Yes, and there's a lot of rain.

Activities
and
Suggestions:        1.     Memorize the dialogue and practice reciting it
                           with a friend.
                    2.     Change the setting to a different part of the
                           world.
                    3.     Learn to describe the weather in the place you
                           come from using comparative and superlative
                           forms.   (See Grammar Handbook for further
                           explanation.)




                                    *160*




                                                        161   Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON TWENTY-THREE




                                        ..
                                      LiLP                  (..s. 'u?       )..,3 t

                     c i l.7;.wi' 1
                                tp


                                            L          ,.,-.? i




                                                     .).-.      1       3) CP ."


             .; >c,_p. t              :id ip                                                         LS-6i
                       .4
                 LA......e)k              , (..-....1,i \



                                                 C
                                                       _) j-..)% ( :p
                                                                                               6-:-1-4))




       __...).                                  ,;) 14
                            -        t>
                                                                                                    s -6)




                                          *161*
                                                                                      Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                                            182
j.::>_.Jd   ,:_,3 t....)     Ly,,:ii                                 LESSON             TWENTY-THREE



                                        .,)

                              .    Liti                 \s4r LP              xi l                       cs '
                  1 c..)...)




                    i ., _yi
                           L.-:c                                   33 (P          ,
                                              L:o Li          ,s )-L             LS
                                                                                  _
                                                  J
            L.    :iii              _e L-Z....;.1k            cly....).     .7....-C



                                              (
                                                  '.1")            Li) CP                         3-"" 4'



      Jk" L?                .)---'1-)         j)       1-.P   c>
                                                                          =1.A..5) \
                                                                                                   CS '6 )




                                          *162*
                                                                             1    3
                                                                                       Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON TWENTY-THREE                         WEATHER, CLIMATE & SEASONS




BASIC MATERIAL:      Narrative for memorization.
      /ray/      -   /il-vawm ha:mi hatta/
                     sh- ki: f il-hawa vi sh-shita : `?/
      /hassan/   -   iil- humma:n ma yishbih ii-yawm
                     wa kha:lig amzu:n wa ghuba.: r/
      /ray/      -   /vi blad-i kha: lig ikhtila:f
                     kbi:r bayn ish-shita wa is-sayv/
      /hassan/   - /kha:lig il-barid?/
      /ray/      -   /ahi:h wa kha:lig ya:sir min il-matar/


 Notes on the Basic Material:
 1.     /il-hawa/ means "the weather".
 2.    /il-humma:n/ is "the heat". Literally translated, the sentence
       means "the heat does not resemble today".
 3.    /yishbih/ means "to resemble".        It is usually followed by the
       preposition /1-/.
 4.    /amzu:n/, "clouds" and /ghuba:r/, "dust".           See Additional
       Vocabulary.
 5.    /kha:lig ya:sir min il-matar/ means literally "there is a lot from
       the rain".




                                             18 4
                                    *163*
                                                            Hosted for free on livelingua.com
WEATHER, CLIMATE                        LESSON TWENTY-THREE




ADDITIONAL MATERIAL:     Vocabulary.
   cold                /il-barid/


   the winter          iish-shita:1/           4u,,,..0. \


   the spring          /ir -rabi: c/


   the summer          /is-sayv/

   the autumn          /i1-khari:v/


   humid/wet           /mablu :1/


   How's the
    weather?        /ki:f il-hawa?/


   Today is nice.   /il-yawm zayn/


   the sun          /ish-shams/


   the moon         /il-gamar/


  cloud             /mazan/




                                *164*
                                        B:5
                                              Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                                      ....2...,,,111."




LESSON TWENTY-THWRE                       WE A.THEP. , CLIMATE & SEASONS




   sand                 /tra : b/                        c_ l ..);

   moderate , usual,    /Ca: di/
    customary                                                      ) ...0
                                                        C.i


   dry                 /ya:bis/                       L:1") I)
   drought             /jiva : v/               (.._..;


   storm               /zacvi: g/                L..)-                   c-/
   dawn                /fijr/
                                                               _.--..
   sunset              /maghrib/                :......, ../.3z..1)

                                                                         .
   star                /najm/
                                                             cr.-1
  stars                /nuju :m/
                                                 ri

  sky                  /sima//                          41.t-%-b)




                                 *165*
                                         186
                                                                               Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                TRIP TO BOUTILIMIT
                                Lesson Twenty-Four




Objective:             At the end of this lesson you should be able to tell
                       about an outing in the desert, or a visit to an en-
                       campment or small town. You should also be able
                       to use the grammatical structures necessary for de-
                       scribing past events.

Translation of
Basic Material:        Yesterday Jane and I went to Boutilimit and on the
                       way, we saw a lot of camels in the desert.            When
                       we arrived at the encampment, Sheikh's mother was
                       making "zrig" and his father was buying meat at
                       the market. Later we all sat down together under
                       the tent and ate cous-cous and drank tea. When we
                       finished    the meal the girls (put henna on their
                       hands).

Activities:       1.   Listen to your teacher reading the narrative.
                       Think about the scene being described.
                  2.   Practice making "WH-questions" ("What did you see
                       in the desert?", "Where did you go?", etc.), listen-
                       ing to or repeating some of the answers your
                       teacher gives.
                  3.   Retell the narrative in your own words, asking
                       your teacher for help as you need. Try to vary
                       some of the details of the story as appropriate.

Suggestions:      1.   Find out the names of Mauritanian dishes such as
                       /zrig/, /mafi/, "chebbijin", and "cous-cous", and
                       see if you can learn how to make them.




                                      *166*




                                               167
                                                         Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON TWENTY-FOUR




        Jci 14-P. ), &   j1/40%J,     L:,_.',
                                                          ) ,-'          3       .}




                ci .})1 3      ..L..7._;        ..., LS             ,.

                                                                             C




                                                            Hosted for free on livelingua.com
0,   -Je"        &Y ' cP;;31                                                      LESSON TWENTY-FOUR




                       Jam'.,'           ,,-.4_--!                                                                    (...'-'' V


                                                                                                     -
        Ls       j u.-P .9 %           .),          ./.0 6            t....1:-:                      4        , I.)         e




                                                                                   ,     _           k
                                                       k.A.1.41,.."                    .,........,                     --)..3- ....> L6) \




                                             ...
                                                                 -
                                                                                  (.......... i....>




             ,   =t-,).)-ti \          j                  r.,              .___s ,-'-'.
                                                                                             ,.
                                                                                                            6 I-'           0




                                                                                            .        ..
                  :*t..k.-      \     __-_tJ               Lp:k.                           U ...k-w_.9                  & ......se




                                       k: k         U.,                                  cy.,(,--f                           l;lf

                             .)_:t_                CJ.1                 .kw                          i;,,,s,                L;-;-) \




                                                   *168*'                1&i
                                                                                                         Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON TWENTY-FOUR                                    TRIP TO BOUTILIMIT




BASIC MATERIAL:        Narrative for Memorization.
       /ya:mis mishi:na ana wa jayn           bu:ti:limi:t wa vi ta:rig shivna
       ya:sir min ii -ijme:1 vi 1-ba :diya. aynta wasulna shu:r il-virga umm
       shaykh ka:Eat t addl iz-zri:g wa abu-h ka:n yishri laham vi 1-
       marsa. ba adi:n ga adna ka:mili:n taht il-khayma wa kilna kuskus
       wa sharibna atay. aynta uvi:na it -luki:1 il-mina : t thannu./




 Notes on the Basic Material:
 1.     /ya:sir min it -ijma:1/ means literally "a lot/many from the camels";
        in other words, "a lot of camels."
 2.     /vi ta:rig/ means "along the way", or "on the way". See Note
        below.
 3.     /umm shaykh/ means "mother of Sheikh (a boy's name)".                 See
        Lesson on Genitive in G: ammar Handbook.
 4.     /ka:nat tcaddia illustrates the use of the Past Progressive
        -literally "she was she does." See Grammar Handbook lesson
        on this point for further reference.
 5.     /abu-h/ - "father-his"
 6.     /ka:n yishri/ - "he was buying"
 7.     /bacadi:n gacadna/ - "afterwards, we sat"
 8.     /ka:mili:n/ - together
 9.     /taht il-khayma/ - "under the tent"
 10.    /aynta uvi:na/ "When we finished ..."
 11.    /il-mina:t thannu/ - "the girls henna-ed themselves". This il-
        lustrates a reflexive verb in Hassaniya.


Cultural Note:
/vi ta:rig/, "on the road," or "along the way" can be expressed in
several other ways in Hassaniya. "Goudron," a French word for
asphalt or tarmac, is often used to mean simply "the paved road", a
relatively new phenomenon in Mauritanian life.



                                    *169*   190
                                                            Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LIFE IN THE DESERT                                     LESSON TWENTY-FOUR




ADDITIONAL VOCABULARY:        Life in the Desert.
    tent              /khayma/
                                                      "1-c2"P

   desert            /ba : diya/                            ..    6

   goat              /canz/

   camel (m)         /ijmal/
                                                                   t

           (f)       /na:qa/                           ;1- ; U


           (p1)      /ijma :1/
                                                Uk-L'
   encampment        If irga/                         'It; .y..

   fire              /na : r/
                                                         iU
   chief             /shaykh/                           s..>+


   tribe             /gabi : la/                   al_AA;

   mat               /Iasi : ra/           -.01,.........2.--P"


   family (3)        /ahl/
                                                   3,
                     /usra/                       O      ......   I


                     /ca: ila/                     ZW> VC


   relatives         /aga : rib/
                                               c-:1
   wind, breeze      /ri:h/

                                 *170*
                                                       ei
                                                                  Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                          191.
LESSON TWENTY-FOUR




                     Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                             PARTS OF THE BODY
                             Lesson Twenty-Five




Objective        At the end of this lesson , you will be able to identify
                        of the body    . By learning the Supplementary
                 Material, you will be able to describe your state of
                 health and to give the common symptoms of illnesses .

Basic Material: Illustration (Human body with labeled parts).
                 head                  body          tongue
                 eyes                  arm           neck
                 nose                  hand (s)      teeth
                 ear                   mouth         legs
                 shoulder'             foot          chest
                 stomach

Activities   .   1 .   Memorize the Arabic names for parts of the body .
                 2.    Make up a game based on recitation of names for
                       parts of the body , such as "Simon Says' .
                 3.    If your job involves medical diagnosis or treatment,
                       make sure you learn all of this plus any others you
                       need at this time .

suggestions      1.    Make a point of saying the Arabic names for parts
for Use :              of the body to yourself as you go through your
                       daily routine (washing your face, putting on your
                       shoes, etc )
                                  .




                                      *172*



                                                     1 8 rd
                                                          0
                                                              Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LE.,SON TWENT Y -11 1 v F.                 PARTS OF THE BODY




                                                                     (9




                             *173*

                                     194        Hosted for free on livelingua.com
PARTS OF THE BODY                LESSON       TWENTY-FIVE




                    *174:


                            1 9,r,-)   Hosted for free on livelingua.com
 LESSON TWENTY-FIVE                   HEALTH AND SYMPTOMS OF ILLNESS




 ADDITIONAL MATERIAL:          Useful words and phrases.

      What's the matter*...
         with you (m.)           /ma :1-ak/
              with you? (f.)     /ma:1-ik/
              with him?          /ma:1-u/
              with her?          /ma :1 -ha/

     Does anything
              hurt you? (m.)     /yu:jac-ak shi?/
              hurt you? (f.)     /yu:jac-ik shi?/
     Are you in pain?
         (to a woman)            /inti muju:ca?/           c   _
                                                               caS.)_0'        t.:11
              (to a man)         /inta muju : c?/          c
     I have a head ache.
     ("my head hurts me.") /yu:jac-ni ra:s-i/
     I have a stomach ache.
     ("my stomach hurts     /tu : jac-ni kirsh-i/
       me.")
     I have a tooth ache.       ,/yu : jac-ni sinn-i/

     diarrhea, cramps           /wajac il-kirsh/
     a cough                    /kahha/
     a cold                     /barda:n/

*See Grammar Handbook 1E,sson on Interrogatives for further reference.




                                    *175*
                                               I DC            Hosted for free on livelingua.com
 HEALTH AND SYMPTOMS OF ILLNESS                  LEPSON         TWENTY-FIVE




        nausea           /igla:b/
        fatigue          /tacab/
        weight           /wazan/

        fever            /hum/
        worms.
           parasites     /du : d/

        urine            /bu:1/

        injection        /dagga/
        pill             /habba/
        pills            /habb/


Note:   Also see Health Glossary elsewhere in this Handbook for further
health-related vocabulary.



 Cultural Note:
 Because of a tendency among Arabs to spare you bad news, or to
 avoid talking directly about something like the ill health of a loved
 one , a certain persistence may be
                                     necessary in order to divine the
 cause of an illness or complaint. Note that the question for "What's
 the matter?" translates best as "How are you?" and your first re-
 sponse to such a question is likely to be "fine".




                                            I
                                    *176*

                                                   Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON TWENTY-FIVE




  A.-11 i.4--AP 4J--44
         am novitmomaLoss WO
 12to
         millerzv

          ----.2
lilla
RFUOUGUE IS&MIOUE CE MAURITAME




                                 4CPUILOL.E iSLA14101.1 De MAURJTANiE




                                               177*
                                                 198                    Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                              AT THE TAILOR'S
                              Lesson Twenty-Six




Objective:     At the end of this lesson you should be able to give a
               tailor simple instructions for making you a garment.
Translation
of Dialogue:   Jane.        Hello.

               Tailor:      Hello. How are you?
               Jane:        Very well.     I    want you to make me a skirt.
               Tailor:      Have you brought the material with you?
               Jane:        Yes.  anti here's a picture.         I want something
                            like this but a little longer.
               Ti,.ilor     O.K.     Come back in a week.
               Jane:        God willing.       Goodbye.
               Tailor:      Goodbye

Activities:    1       Practice saying the lines of the dialogue with a
                       classmate. a friend or your teacher. Switch roles
                       and vary the instructions you give the tailor.
                       Go to the market and enquire .bout the price and
                       names of the different kinds of cloth and material.
                       Compare notes with your classmates and learn the
                       names of the items you have most need for.

Suz:geot:ons   1.      Go to a tailor's shop to enquire about having some-
fcr Use:               thing made: if you are satisfied with his price and
                       workmanship always go back to the same shop.
                       You should find that as a regular customer you will.'
                       be invited to sit awhile and drink tea. Take ad-
                       vantage of this opportunity to listen to typical ex-
                       changes between a shopkeeper and customers and
                       also to practice your Arabic.



                                      x178*




                                                   4 Li
                                                             Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON TWENTY-SIX




                                                                                                                .J-P



                S
                    ,.)" ld            .SL         .        - :u1L) I
                                                            k
                                                                                  (cis                       '0, 1,4>


                                                        ,
                         r
                         3 ..., )-)                    .\1)     11 cy- ,-)
                                                                             (3 -?--:--


                                C          , 1-x.               C.-- tj \             (5--1,P.
                                                                                       00




     (-__5-.1       ,    -),-
                                       ,i_/ _31, .>         ...c La

                                                                             .1
                                                   ex 1...,           cs ...t...a."




                                    ...t..a...A.                _.)      1
                                                       ...g .



                        c-1. :A...J-01                            c:O.M       i 1-Z)        6 is




                                              *179*
                                                   20                                        Hosted for free on livelingua.com
Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON TWENTY-SIX
                                                            AT THE TAILOR'S



BASIC MATERIAL:      Dialogue for Memorization.
     /jayn/               /is-sala:mu calay-kum/
     /khay-ya:t,'         /ucalay-kum is-sala:m. ya:k la ba:s?/
     /jay; ,'             /la ba : s il-hamdu li lla: h ndu : r-ak
                                                        .

                          tikhayyat 1-i ju:b/
     /khayya:t/           /jibti il-'Thant maca:-ik?/
     /jayn,               /ahi:h wa ha:k         ndu:r shi mithl
                          ha:dhi yaghi:r shway utwil/
     /khayya:t.           /aywa. irjaci bacad isbu.`./
     jayn/                /in sha:' alla:h. maca s-sala:ma/
     /khayya:t/           /maca s- sala : ma/



Not's on the Dialogue:
1.    /tikhayyat/ literally means "you sew" and in this context trans-
      lates the English "make".
2.    /ju:b/ means "skirt". It is the French word "jupe" transliter-
      ated into Arabic.
3.    jkhant,' means "material".
4.    /utwil/ means "longer" See the Lesson
      Superlatives in The Grammar Handbook. on Comparatives and




                                   *181*
                                           202
                                                            Hosted for free on livelingua.com
AT THE TAILOR'S
                                                 LESSON TWENTY-SIX




ADDITIONAL MATERIAL:     Material and sewing words.
   material (cloth)    /khant/

   rayon. nylon        /tirghq:I/

   cotton              /gutun/

   silk                /hari:r/
   wool                /su:7/

   linen               /bazan/

   polished cotton    /wa:kh/

   embroidery         /zakharava/

   yard               /yarad/

  meter               /maytar/

  "pagne" (wrap
   around cloth)      /pan/

  thread              /silk/

  needle              /ibra/




                                *182*
                                        2 0r)
                                                 Hosted for free on livelingua.com
    LESSON TWENTY-SIX                                                                                                     AT THE           * ILOR'S



                                                                                                                                                     ---...--


                                                                                                                    -_-....




              --1,1..--
                                                                                                  .....,..___



                                                                        if




                                                                                                                                                       ff


    L



                                                                                                                                                    ,U
                                                                                                                I

                                                                                                           0

.....                                                     "....---...-j1=-.. le




.        -/--..-----_,--':.----.. .-:::::...er4,44,r44.
        ,,,,..............__-"'"-                                                 .............



             i....2-...




                                                                       *183*

                                                                                                                          Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                                                                            204
                      HOUSE AND BASIC FURNISHINGS
                               Lesson Twenty-Seven




Objective.       At the end of this lesson. you should be able to say
                 the Arabic names for parts of a house. and identify
                 basic furnishings       ou may find in your own house .

Basic
Material:        Parts of a House.
                      house                        garden
                      sitting room                 courtyard
                      bedroom                      trees
                      room                         door
                      wall                         window
                      ceiling                      bathroom/toilet
                      floor                        sink
                      stairs                       kitchen


Activities   .   1.   Draw a larger s( ale diagram of a house on the black-
                      board or on a flip-chart. Write the names of the
                      parts of a house in Arabic. Point to various items
                      and ask your classmates to identify them.
                 .1
                      Us,ng rods or other building "blocks" construct a
                                    ,

                      hypothetical house in class talking about different
                      rooms . etc




                                        )518-P4




                                                    25      Hosted for free on livelingua.com
    LESSON TWENTY -SEVEN




                           *185*
                                   206'
                                          Hosted for free on livelingua.com

t
             LESSON TWENTY-SEVEN




-a
a




     *186*

                  Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON TWENTY-SENTEN       HOUSE AND BASIC FURNISHINGS




                               sadra:ay/



                       /hari:tha/


           /ha:yit/
                                                           L1
                                                    lava:b /
            /kuwwa/     /sa:lu:n/



                                                   /matbakhr"
                                                   /ku:zi:n/

                                                           IN
                                                           twali : t,
          /imta:1


                                                       t
                                                           / a:b/
                                    /bayt ir-riga:d/

   I-
   I

                       *187*           208
                                             Hosted for free on livelingua.com
PARTS OF A HOUSE & BASIC FURNISHINGS                 LESSON TWENTY-SEVEN




ADDITIONAL MATERIAL:       Basic Furnishings.
Activity :   Learn the words for these basic furnishings.                Try to find
             out typical prices for things you I ill need to buy and
             seek the advice of your friends and experienced volun-
             teers.
                  chair            /mageada/                    O ..07..5L

                  sink             /lava : bu/                    y G.)
                  tap              /rubina/                            :za.,l
                  cooker/stove     /il-buwi/
                                                                _5' Yi
                  fridge           /fri: ji: dayr/        y ...x...L.3.= )

                  cupboard         /armu : r/                    i }-')
                  tub              /si: wa/
                                                                   _),r+
                  bucket           /dalu/                               ,)
                  spoon           /kiddu/
                 fork             /fu : rshat/            ,_...:-..;-;-,., }-'

                 knife            /mi.'s/
                                                                   L.)-1-

                 platter          /tabsi :I/                   (Y.f4:-

                 bowl (small)     /ji : ra/                        0 54'.
                 plate            /plat/                           ,._:-.L)

                 cup              /ka:s/                       (....) 1-
                 broom            /balayya/

                 sheet            /dra/                            1      .>



                                 *188*
                                                          Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                                 2 0 !i
LESSON TWENTY-SEVEN                                    BASIC FURNISHINGS




                   mattress               /matla/

                   bed                    /ma cka/

                   teapot                 /barra: d/
                   electricity            /kahraba/
                   well                   /ha : si/
                                                                   aw,




Suggestions
for Use:      Consult with former Volunteers in your host community
              (if there have been any) or with other people familiar
              with the area Find out which household items you will
                              .

              need, and where they can be found. Learn the Arabic
              names for the items on your list and how much they cost.




                                  *189*
                                              21u           Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                            HEALTH INTERVIEW

                           Lesson Twenty-Eight




Objective:    At the end of this lesson, you should be able to ask
              pertinent questions in a typical health interview. When
              you learn the Supplementary Material, you will be able to
              recognize the Arabic for many common health complaints
              and diseases.
Basic
Material:     Nurse:       How old is your child?
              Mother:      He was born in 1974.
              Nurse:       What's wrong with him?
              Mother:      He's got a fever and stomach ache.
              Nurse:       Since when?
              Mother:      For a week.
              Nurse:       What does he usually eat?
              Mother:      He eats rice, potatoes and bread.
              Nurse:       You must change his diet (food).
                           He needs more protein.
              Mother:      What kinds of food?
              Nurse:       Eggs, milk, meat and fish are the best.

Activities:   1.   Listen, as your teacher and another speaker "role-
                   play"     dialogue.     Practice   asking an        answering
                   the questions yourself, checking your pronunciation
                   with your teacher.
              2.   Memorize the dialogue and role-play it for your
                   class with another learner.
              3.   Change the nature of the complaint and suggest the
                   appropriate medical advice. Refer to the Supple-
                   mentary Material for further vocabulary.
Suggestions
for Use:      1.   Find out from your teacher or a medical co-worker
                   the names of the most common medical complaints of
                   patients in a Mauritanian clinic.
              2.   Listen to your co-workers and colleagues perform
                   their duties in Arabic. Note the most common
                   questions asked and answers given, and learn how
                   to say them.

                                   *190*        211 Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON TWENTY-EIGHT                     1:J     Ly>




             VA7/4-




            cEJ




                              212
                      *191*
                                    Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                       J
 ))':41d1       *(3.-1;)k     cf)                                 LESSON TWENTY-EIGHT




                                            e      ...LAC'
                                                                                        ":1-A-AA49
                                                                                          .-




            .    /                              L.5;-4        0




22)                               )                     L)-(>-)    ).5"


                              :)




                            .>"       <P')         c5`4"     Lt"9     k




                                           *192*
                                                              213 Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON TWENTY-EIGHT                                        HEALTH INTERVIEW




BASIC MATERIAL:           Dialogue for memorization.
       itabi:ba/:        /tful-ik cand-u kam sana:'?/
      /umm/:                      khlag vi ca:m 1974/
      itabi:ba/:          ma:1-u?/
      /umm/    .         'cand-u it -humma wa yu:jac-u kirsh-u/
       tabi:ba/:              aynta?/
      /umm'              -min isbu:c,
      /tabi:ba       :   ,ash yu:kil ca:datan?/
       umm,              ihuwa yu kil ma:ru wa bumdiiayr wa mbu:ru/
      i tabi : ba, .      wa:jib calay-ik tibdili 1-u lu:ki:1
                         huwa yuhta:j ya:sir min il-bru:ti:n/
      /umm/:             /shinhu min lu:ki:1?/
       tabi:ba     :      ahsan      it -baydh wa laham wa 1-hu:t wa laban/


 Notes on the Basic Material:
 1.     /tful' is a young boy. Another word you will hear is /wild/.
 2.         cand-u
        /         kam 5ana:',' means literally "he has how many years?"
        and is used to convey the equivalent of our "How old is
 3.     /huwa khlag/ - note that the Past Tense in Arabic is used to
        translate the English "He was born .".
4.      /humma/ means "fever".
5.     /yu:jac-u kirsh-u/ literally means "it hurts him his stomach".
6.     /wa:jib calay-ik; expresses the equivalent to "you must". It
       means literally "duty on you'. The suffix pronoun will change
       depending upon who is speaking or being referred to.
7.     /tibdili 1-u lu:ki:l/ - "you change his diet", note that the Arabic
       literally "you change for him the food".
8      /yuhta.j/ means "he needs."



                                        *193*
                                                                Hosted for free on livelingua.com
GLOSSARY OF MEDICAL AND                       LESSON TWENTY-EIGHT
 NUTRITIONAL TERMINOLOGY




SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL :    Health Glossary   .




Nutrition :

      protein        /bru : ti: n/
      vitamins       /vi: to :min/
      energy         /ta qa/
      fatigue        /tacab/
      anemia         /ifru : g id-damm/
      malnourished   / su : ' it-taghdhiya/

      sickness       /maradh/
      health         /sihha/
      sick           /marl: dh/
      well           /shi: h/
      nutriments     /ghitha' : i/

General Medical:

      bacteria       /bakti: riya/
      blood          / damm/

      cell           /khiliya/
      lungs          /riyya/
      stomach        /kirsh/
      growth         lnamu/




                                 *194*              27 t-
                                                        Hosted for free on livelingua.com
 LESSON TWENTY-EIGHT                        GLOSSARY OF MEDICAL AND
                                            NUTRITIONAL TERMINOLOGY



      prevention         /wa ca : ya/                          Zi..) Is,
      diarrhea           /lasi/
                                                                 5x')
      infection          /wajc/
                                                                ti?
      injecti,,ri        /dagg/
                                                                     3-)
      vaccination       /sharta/                                  )      -
                                                               - L,..)}..4.
      clean             /nadhi: f/                     _-`>
                                                          (



     cleanliness        /in-nadha : fa/              -; 4;3\
     soap               /sa:bu:n/
                                                                ,. l')
     fever              /humma/
     contagious         /cadwa/                               a .., -.L.0
     nausea             /agtha : b/                   (           L',..; l

     bandage            /ida : wa/                        0-  2 ..) k
     medicine
     nurse (m . )
                        /dawa/                                   1
                                                                     ,   ..)

                        /tbi: b/                                   t
                                                          __.,......)
     doctor (m )    .   /tbi : b/                         __.......-10

     midwife            /gabba : dha/

Disease specific:

     intestines         /musa:ri:n/
     bladder            /imabu : la/
     urine              /bu :1/




                                    *195*   216
                                                          Hosted for free on livelingua.com
 GLOSSARY OF MEDICAL AN!                                  LESSON TWENTY-EIGHT
 NUTRITIONAL TERMINOLOGY



     breast                /bazu:la/                                               -ej)J).
     vagina                /raham/
     abortion (2)
                                                                                     cj? /
                           /ijha:d/        ) Le I /tacji:v
                                                                              0-k-x3
     miscarriage           /iti: h il-kirsh/                    Ly)}61                 -..19 1.
                                                                                     C.:
     smallpox              /jidri/
                                                                            C...C.           LC:
     tuberculosis (2)     /sucla/        ;41.-4,....,   /sil/
                                                                                    (.}Aj3
     measles              /buhaymuru:n/
     tetanus (2)
                                                                       6,J.g.
                          /tata:nus/
                                                                            LPL-6
                          /dagit musma;r/                       .d,......          ._:-...5 ..)

     whooping cough       /tashta:g/                                          .-       ol.   AA
                                                                            ,,I....,.J.....%)
     dehydrated           /mustahim/
     hepatitis            /alam il-kibd/                                    ..),.l%          i.k.


     cholera              /ku:li:ra/                                         I i:Ji
     jaundice             /asfa:r/
                                                                              /     CA...o I

     malaria              /tawja:d/                                           .,k4'..);
     microbes             /mi: kru :b/
                                                                      L.)11''
     worms                /du:d/                                                   .),,...)
    parasites             /du:d/                                                   .)}....)
    wound                 /jarah/
                                                                              E.."
Pregnancy and child birth:
    contraception         itaccii:m/
                                                                               ri-3z;
    conception/
      pregnancy           /haml/
                                                                                     Y8-1)
    sexual` intercourse   /jima:c/
                                                                              t..\-44!

                                     *196*
                                                                217           Hosted for free on livelingua.com
 LESSON TWENTY-EIGHT                             GLOSSARY OF MEDICAL AND
                                                 NUTRITIONAL TERMINOLOGY



         uterus             /raham/
         sperm              /mani/
        eggs                /baydh/
        fetus               /jani:n/
        ovary               / baydh/
        birth               /il-wila:da/
        delivery           /khla:s/
        placenta           /shaba : t ishi: r/
        umbilical cord     /habl
                            - is-sarra/
                                 -
        labor              /camal/
        contrac dons       /ingaba : d/

Other miscellaneous:

        height             /tu:I/
        weight
                                                                 3)-12
                           /wazan/
                                                                 3;2.
        feces
        heartbeat
                           /limakhraj/
                           /harakat il-galb/        (...11) I
                                                                -6   >'
                                                                     N.j.
        blood pressure     /idh-dhaght id-dammawi/ ... -:.,.1 i:e.,11
                                                  (r..S Y




Note:

Refer back to the drawings on pp. 100-101 and with your new vocabu-
lary, discuss again in depth the implications that these drawings have
for development in Maurits. aia.


                                     *197*,                     Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                           -41 8
                         AGRICULTURAL TALK
                          Lesson Twenty-Nine




Objective:     At the end of this lesson, you should be able to make
               inquiries about local agriculture.     By learning the
               Supplementary Material, you will be able to use additional
               important agricultural terminology.




Translation
of Basic
Material:      A:   What do you grow in (region) ?
               B:   We have   (name of crop) .
               A:   Do you grow any vegetables?
               B:   A few, in the South.
               A:   When do you plant?
               B:   In   (season)    .



               A:   And when do you harvest?
               B:   We harvest in (month)   .




Activities:    1.   Using the words   in the Supplementary Material,
                    substitute the names of agricultural crops and
                    products as answers to the first question.
Suggestions:   1.   Practice the dialogue with a friend, and ask the
                    questions to someone from a particular area. Find
                    out where local foodstuffs come from.




                                    *198*




                                                 2"j   Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON TWENTY-NINE




                             (
                                 j   L;da...4




                                 _7-




                     *199*
                                          220   Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                       LESSON        TWENTY-NINE




s                                                         t




            `:       ,-;0-,     -:4-                     t




                 t




            '.   .,;,4-       t.:4-.J t                  I




                        j     ..., AAP......4




    *200*
                      22 i
                               Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                                                                              i




LESSON TWENTY-NINE                                    AGRICULTURAL TALK




BASIC MATERIAL:         Dialogue for Memorization and Adaptation.
        A:   /shinhu tizracu vi                 ?/
        B:   /nizracu             ./
        A:   /tizracu il-khudha : r?/
        B:   /shway vi 1-gibla/
        A:   /aynta tigharrasu?/
        B:   /vi              /
        A:   /wa aynta tihrathu?/
        B:   /nihsadu vi           ./


  Notes on the Basic Material:
  1.     /tizracu/ means "you (pl.) grow".
  2.     /khudha:r/ means "vegetables".
  3.     /il-gibla/ is "south".
  4.     /tigharrasu/ means "you (pl.) plant". /tihrathu/, is you (pl.)
         harvest". /nihasadui is an alternative word for "harvest".




Note:
Refer back to the drawings on pp. 100-101 and with your new vocabu-
lary, discuss again in depth the implications that these drawings have
for development in Mauritania.


                                        *201*   222
                                                          Hosted for free on livelingua.com
AGRICULTURAL TALK                                         LESSON TWENTY-NINE




SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL:          Agricultural glossary.

    field/plot( s )    /harth/               (.... _d_p   /ahra : th/              (_> %, 1

    fence              /azri : t/

    fertilizer        /cars/

    grass             /arbi : ca/

   weeds              /agli : c arbi : ca/

   hoe                /igja : y/

   shovel             /abi :1/

   rake               /rachu/

   plow               /wati : r/

   yoke               /awati :1/

   irrigation canal   /gasb lis-sagi/

   pipe/pipes         /gasb/                 (--.43       /agsa : b/            ,. 1,..L; 1

   pump               /abu : nb/
                                                                                 `-1 ., 1
   motor              /muti: r/
                                                                                     ,X..':'

   generator          /jini : ra : ti : r/
                                                                                 7) 1".4-P



                                    *202*
                                                           Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                               2 o3
                                                  h..,
 LESSON TWENTY-NINE
                                             AGRICULTURAL TALK




      soil/earth       /trab/

     stone             /hajara/

     valley (2)        /sahl/

                       /gu : di

     dune (2)          /calb/

                      /zi : ra/

     mountain         /jabal/

     sack             /asgi: ID/

     two kilos        /mudd/

     100 Kgs.         /bari: ga/


Names of crops   :




    peanuts           /il-gart/

    millet, sorghum   /il-azrac/

    maize/corn        /il-makka/




                                  *203*         Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                      22 4
AGRICULTURAL GI,OSSARY                                   LESSON TWENTY-NINE




     wheat                 /il-gamh/

    pepper
                                                                       ek
                           /abu : bar/

    beet                   /bitra:v/

Verbs:       (given in "he" form of Present Tense)

    to cultivate (2)       /yizrac/              ).,     /yihrath/           .._:...",_

    to grow                /yinbat/                                         C.:--A)i)


    to die                 /imu:t/                                           c:--.), 1

    to water               /yisgi/
                                                                             Lfwj
    to harvest (2)         /yihsad/          AQ___..4_
                                                         /yihrath/           Z...A
    to store               /yilam/
                                                                                  c )-
                                                                                  ce-


   to destroy             /yihdam/
                                                                                 .)"/").-
   to eat                 /yukil/

   to plant               /yigharras/
                                                                            c.)"">_.
   to dig                 /yijhar/

   to hoe
      hoe                 /yigbi/
                                                                               c.5%"2-

   to plow                /yuti:1/
                                                                                CY`j--


                                     *204*
                                                            Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON TWENTY-NINE                                            AGRICULTURAL GLO-SARY




   to pull                     Iyintur/

   to kill                     /yigtal/

   to fertilize               /idi: r il-cars/

   to rain                    /yimtar/

   to transplant              /yigharras/




                  The name of Allah is repeated to form this eight-pointed star




                                                                              Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                           *7       6
AGRICULTURAL GLOSSARY                             LESSON TWENTY-NINE




ADDITIONAL VOCABULARY:         Names of Months.
     January            /yana:yir/

     February           /fibra:yiri

     March              /ma: rs/

     April              /abri:l/

     May                /mi:h/

     June               /yu:ni/

     July               /yu : li/

     August             /aghasht/

     September          /sibtimbi: r/

     October            /uktu:bi:r/

     November          /nuvimbi: r/

     December          /disimbi: r/



Activity: Find out the names of the Islamic months. You have already
seen two - Ramadan and Hajj, which are the two most well-known.
Although the Islamic months exist side-by-side with the Gregorian
months, the latter are used much more frequently in everyday
Mauritanian life.


                                             227
                                    *206*
                                                      Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON TWENTY-NINE




                             228
                     *207*         Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                IN THE FIELD
                                Lesson Thirty




Objective:    At the end of this dialogue you should be able to further
              your inquiries about local agriculture, and practice using
              the conditional in Arabic.


Translation   Sam:        Hello. What did you plant here?
of Blsic      Ah:nad:     I   planted beets     here and corn over there.
Material:     Sam:        Did you put fertilizer on the field?
              Ahmad:      No.    There isn't any in this area.
              Sam:        If you use (used) fertilizer the crops will grow
                          better.
              Ahmad:      If you bring (brought) me a little, I will put
                          it. (on the crops)
              Sam:        I'll speak to my director tomorrow. If I haven't
                          brought it to you before Friday, come to the
                          office in Nouakchott and I'll give you a sack
                          of it.


Activities:   1.     Using the words from the Agricultural Glossary in
                     Lesson 29, substitute the names of other agricultural
                     crops and products as answers to the first question.
                     Learn any regional alternatives for the agricultural
                     vocabulary used in this Lesson.
              2.     Practice this dialogue in class with your teacher.
                     Discuss the agricultural patterns and practices
                     of the different regions of Mauritania.




                                   *208*




                                                            Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                                  22D
LESSON THIRTY
                                                                                                                   6_,"->3 L/;1)-"


 c     .                                      .,
        L., _)i"            ------            -rc         C)'" 1            (LI'                                                            c Li



                                                    ,       0 ....)         ..._,..9   ..)"-1.         c....st.0                                      1




               (
                        (2-,5.4> >h
                                                                                                                                            c



     7....i..12.....0         ....c .:1,.    ;)     Ls:      Li...). LP                  L.,                  k...L.)




                        1                  (__:,-,..--)    c.; U.-L.3 %         ,1:-Lez.,,) I                      .%.3 k                  ,    Ur)



                                                                                                                        .3


                                        .7! -6              cs ,-):'              LI c_:)-&-P                      ..-)k




                                     ..3




                                                                                                                                           c
                                      I-R. r? \             1.),-,-;      ...) 9.:,A.s.                     I.,        ;\
                        &,- .9                , ,..,..) 1                                ,.....,.7.111
                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                         ...A4


                                                                                                   I         .......(41.0..
                                                                                   .




                                                                        *209*                  230                  Hosted for free on livelingua.com
0 3s );::Jt                     (..)' ) "II\                                                  LESSON THIRTY




   C




              c                    >
                                       ... ) 3 _, -.) \ 1'                         --A-4 /)                       -ix I



            e
                   `'-x ))                     c   s;                                                         s'


7.L.Lia.-jol        Ls      L               .




                                    ..
   'Ly._,..,-p I    (.....-..,- .......,
                                                                et:Ake-L.4J\                                        L.
                                                                                                               C




                      c.
                                                                LI

                                                                             ...

                                                                                                              c

       2     k
                                                            ...)/J     ci.L.f.         b >7
                                           ":-A.(5-;     L ./        c....-,.--3/1 \    d.7:"



                                                         *210*
                                                                               23i        Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LESSON THIRTY
                                                               IN THE FIELD



BASIC MATERIAL:      Dialogue for Memorization:
     /sa:m/               /is-sala:mu calay-kum. ash gharrast hu:n?/
     /ahmad/              /zract bitra : v hu : n wa 1-makka hu:k/
     /sa:m/               /dirt il-angray vawg il-ahra:th?/
     /ahmad/              /abda.     ma:hu kha:lig vi ha:dhi 1-mintaga/
     /sa:m/               /illa stacmilt-u in-nabata:t tinbat ahsan/
     /ahmad/              /illa jibt 1-i shway ndi:r-u/
     /sa:m/               /lahi nitkallam maca mudi:E-i is-subh. illa ma
                          jibt-u 1-ak gubla il-juma a wahu shu:r il-
                         maktab vi nua:kshu:t wa lahi na ti:-k asgi:b
                         min-u/




Notes on the Basic Material:
1.    /il-angray/- the. french word "engrais".
      and is widely understood.                      It means "fertilizer"
2.    /iLla/ - "ff." For further reference on "if" sentences, see The
      Grammar Handbook Lesson on Conditionals.
3.    /a h san/     a comparative form meaning "better."
      Grammar Handbook on Comparatives and Superlatives See
                                                        for
                                                            The
                                                            fur-
      ther information.
4.    /wahay/     in the imperative form, meaning "come".
5.    /asgi:b min-u/ - literally "a sack from it."




                                   *211* 2 3 2
                                                         Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                     APPENDIX A

                                 HASSANIYA PROVI_RBS
     Mauritanians have many interesting proverbs, and you will undoubtedly
     hear many of them during your visits with families.
                                                          Many of them are
     wise, some are prophetic and still others are humorous,
     display the wonderful musicality, rhythm and rhyme of thebut all of them
                                                               Arabic lang-
 uage See if you can learn some, and try to
                                            use them in the appro-
 priate context. Also, share some American proverbs
 cross the bridge until you get to it") with        (such as "Don't
                                             your friends and hosts.
 1.

         "The creator came before the educator."
                                                                 0

                                                          P 74-7-)
                                                                         L                3>




 2.
                                    3)).          -5 ks              9
         "Always trust your mother, even if she is a hyena."

                         r,)
3.

         "An old man who is lying down can often
         than a young person who is standing up." see better (more clearly)

                                                                         
4.                      ,,1;;)      .())       cx),-
        "Only a person whose meat goes bad can actually be..r the burden
        of his own misfortune." (This could apply to a mother  who gives
        birth to a crippled child, for example.)


5.
                                                                             0
                                                                                 /             .-
                                                                     3Ar?
        "If you want to run away, get going before your pursuer catches
        up with you."

                                                           I
6.

        "You can't do anything good for a person who doesn't obey you."
                                       *213*



                                               233                   Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                       0/
7.
                                    ),-%-;                     1,  31
      "If someone doesn't see the sky, you shouldn't try to show it to
      him, because ihe most likely doesn't want to see it."


8.                                                    LAz"- 6
      "The view doesn't fill the stomach." (Or, in order to enjoy some-
      thing completely, it is not enough just to look.)

                                                 0w                               o

9.

      "To plan ahead is often dangerous - we can never be sure of our
      plans." (Literally, "Numbers and calculations shouldn't be put
      into our pockets.")

                                            ow
                                                  r
10.
                               (it-4
      "A person who has been bitten by a snake will from then on be
      afraid merely of a rope that might resemble that snake."


11.

      "It is better to speak directly with someone with whom you have
      business than to use a go-between (or intermediary)."

                                                  /            %AI
                                                                     .
                                                      to       (1                 3'
      "Why look for someone better when you already have someone who
      is good?"    (Literally, "He who has been known his mother
      shouldn't be breast-fed by his grandmother.")




                                  *214*
                                                           Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                   APPENDIX B
                   LANGUAGE BEHAVIORAL OBJECTIVES*


    These two lists of b6avioral objectives may be useful to you as a
way of keeping track of ,L.,ir progress and planning your study of
Hassaniya.     By the end of the training program you should probably be
able to do all the communication tasks in List A, and you should be
working on the tasks in List B. Eventually, you should be able to do
all the tasks in both Lists A and B in order Lo be fully effective in
your work.

LIST A: - I can perform the following communication tasks adequately:
( )   1.     Greetings, social introductions, and leave taking.

( )   2.     Give Lnd ask for directions.

( )   3.     Handle currency; ask for change.

( )   4.     Make purchases (food, clothing, tickets).

( )   5.     Order a simple meal.

( )   6.     Get around using public transportation.

( )   7.     Give and request simple autobiographical information, i.e.
             nationality , marital status, occupation, date and place of birth.
             Give height and weight in metric system.

( )   8.     Describe my family.    Request similar information from another.

( )   9.     Have some success in bargaining at the market.




*Adapted from Le Francais Essential pour L'Afrique Francophone, Peace
Corps, Washington D.C. , 1978.

                                      *215*


                                              235
                                                             Hosted for free on livelingua.com
LIST B:             - I can perform the following communication tasks adequately                               .




( )        1.       Everything from List A         .




( )       2.        Describe' present and/or most recent job or activity in , ime
                    detail. Request similar information from another person.

( )       3.        Give detailed information about family and hometown
                                                                    ,                                 ,   and
                    request similar information from another person.
( )       4.        Give a brief autobiography.            Tell about immediate plans and
                    hopes.        Request similar information from anoti ter             .




( )       5.        Describe the geography of the United States or of a familiar
                    location  Request similar information about another country
                              .

                    or location .

( )       6.        Describe the basic structure of the U .S Government and the
                                                                        .

                    IT S
                      .   educational system
                          .
                                                Request similar information about
                                                       .

                    another country      .



          ,-
( )       , .       Describe the purpose and the fu.iction of the Peace Corps.
( )       8.        Give a brief description of hobLies and pastimes.                              Request
                    similar laformation from another person .

( )       9.        Be able to discuss current events, U .S attitudes on race,
                                                                            .

                    foreign policy           culture, foreign aid, etc. in some depth.

INDIVIDUAL OBJECTIVES

          The following are objectives that you should determine for your-
self You might consider subjects or areas that you of tef talk about in
      .

English         .




Describe five areas that you wish to have some fluency in . Two more
spaces are provided for future use. Check each one off as you feel,
you have a gained reasonable fluency in it.




                                                  *216*

                                                              236               Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                 (



                           ENGLISH-HASSANIYA

                                GLOSSARY
                                     -z..




The following list consists of all the vocabulary which appears in TI-:
Communication and Culture Handbook, The Grammar Handbook as well
as a number of entries from a high frequency English word list. At
the end you will find a list of common expressions and idioms. Their
Hassaniya translations are provided in Arabic script; abbreviations in-
dicate the part of speech, gender, and plural forms where relevant.

Key

      (n)      =    noun                        (f)   =   feminine
      (v)      =    verb                        (m)   =   masculine
      (adj.)   =    adjective
      (p1)     =    plural



A


able (adj.)

abortion

about

above (upstairs)

accept (v.)

account

accounts (n. pl.)                                                    (...:- L L......c,



                                      *217*




                                              237         Hosted for free on livelingua.com
ENGLISH-HASSANIYA                       GLOSSARY




act (behave)                                          1.3




act (take action)
                                                    3-c4
action (n.)

add

address (n.)

admit

afraid

after

afternoon

again                                         l.;


against

ago


agree
                                   uks
agriculture                                         i)
agricultural project
                                           L,y-z&*
aid (n )
                                             3) Uz3

                       *218*

                               Hosted for free on livelingua.com
  GLOSSARY
                                  ENGLISH -HASSANIYA




 aid (v)

 air

 airplane

 airport

 all


 allow (v. )

 all right ; O.K.

almost

alms (religious)
                                                      C:... L;)
alone

along

a lot of

,'ready

also

although

always




                    *219*
                            239
                                    Hosted for free on livelingua.com
ENGLISH-HASSANIYA                              GLOSSARY




America


American

among


amount

and

anemia


animal


another

answer (n.)

anyone                                                   A-P

anything

appear

apple

approximately

April

Arabic (n.m.)



                    *220*


                            2 4 0 Hosted for free on livelingua.com
    GLOSSARY
                       ENGLISH-HASSANIYA




    area                                           %


                                             ex.faA-P

 arm

 army

 around

arrive

art

as

ask

assistance

aspirin

at (near)

August
                                                       I
autumn

B


baby

back (n)

                 24i
               *221*
                         Hosted for free on livelingua.com
 ENGLISH-HASSANIYA




bacteria

bad

bag (n)

baggage

tall                         0-5
bananas

bank

barber

basket

bathroom

battery

beach

beat (v.)

beautiful

because

become




                     *222*


                                   Hosted for free on livelingua.com
 GLOSSARY
                      ENGLISH-HASSANIYA




 bed

 bedroom                          I'
 beer

 beet

 before

 begin

behind

believe

belong
                                              J
below

belt

beside

best

better
                                                t
between

big


                243
            *223*          Hosted for free on livelingua.com
 ENGLISH-HASSANIYA                                  GLOSSARY




 biology

 bird

 birthday
                                               >4:p k       Jur
 black

 blackboard

 bladder

blade (razor)

blanket

blood

blood pressure
                                            .1.x)
                               (t*

blue

boat

body

boil (v)
                             (4)
bone

book



                     *224*           Hosted for free on livelingua.com


                             244
                                                                              1




 GLOSSARY
                                     ENGLISH-HASSANIYA




born (v.)

borrow

both

bou-bou

bowl (n)

box

boy

                                                             -       .
brazier                                                      a...) JP


bread

break (v.)

breakfast

breast

breeze

bridge

bring

broken                                                ...-
                                                    c., .9 As
                                                              ....




                               245
                       *225*
                                          Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                CI
             le ..).
ENGLISH-HASSANIYA                               GLOSSARY



                                                                   ..
broom                                                           n )-1.4

brother                                                            ,,
                                                                   C

brush (n)
                                                                   -;
bucket
                                                         Ox-,--)


build
                                                               C5.'-.
building                        s I.A-)                   O        1..4

bureau                                                    (.
                                                                    /    .,

burn
                                                          Li,
bus
                                                           Cf t'.
business                                             .         3    ''
                                                     U
busy
                            J,i."--                      '-',-"'
but
                                4)                       1..1       1-4-


button
                                                         L),-..
buy
                                                          J'>. 1
by




                                   Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                    *226*
                             246
 GLOSSARY                           ENGT TSH-HASSANIYA




 C


cab (taxi)

cable (telegram)

call (v. )

called, named

camel (n.m.)
      (n.f. )
      (pl.)

camera

can (able) (v. )

can (tin) (n)

can opener (n)

cancel

capital (n)

car (auto)

care (for) (v. )

careful


                   *227*   24 ,..
                                         Hosted for free on livelingua.com
ENGLISH-HASSANIYA                                     GLOSSARY




carpet

carrots

carry

case

cash

cassette (tape)

catch (v.)

cause (n)

ceiling

cell (biological)

center (n)

centimeter

century

certain                             -.LP ...)
                            1),..


chain (n)

chair



                    *228*
                             4 '1 u         Hosted for free on livelingua.com
GLOSSARY                     ENGLISH-HASSANIYA




chalk

chance (n)

change

charcoal

charge (v.)

cheap

cheese

chemistry

chief

child

cholera

choose

Christian(s)

church

cigarette                                 (1.JJ i L.,...,

cinema


                       24b
               *229*
                                   Hosted for free on livelingua.com
ENGLISH-HASSANIYA                             GLOSSARY




circle (n)

city

t..c1SS


classical

classroom

clean

clean (adj.)

cleanliness

clear (adj.)

clever

climb


clinic, hospital

clock

close (v.)

closed

cloth



                    *230*
                            25'   Hosted for free on livelingua.com
 GLOSSARY
                                          ENGLISH-HASSANIYA




 clothes
                                                            C.)'" 6`). 1

cloud
                                                                       6,,
cocktail
                                                                             ,5
coffee                                                             2;t5
coin
                                                                   4.;:e..;

cold (n.)                                                              .> J..).


cold (adj. )                                                       ..)
                                                                         l    ,


college
                                                        3k),\Ask

color
                                                                   0 93
comb (n. )
                                                           L'f'''
come
                                                                   A     Le

come back (v. )
                                                                   et /
comfortable

common
                                                             (
                                                             ( ...) LC
                                                         ''(...-
communications, transport                          C., >4.4> \;)

company (business)
                                                        `"* f"'
                                    251
                            *231*              Hosted for free on livelingua.com
 ENGLISH-HASSANIYA                GLOSSARY




complete (adj.)
                                               c ';
conditions

consider

contagious

contain (v.)

continue (v.)

contraception

contractions

control (v.)

cook (v.)

cooker, stove

cool (adj.)

cooperate, help (v.)

cooperative

copy (v.)

corn, maize




                       Hosted for free on livelingua.com
'imq,,, ., t ...   --


                   GLOSSARY                         ENGLISH-HASSANIYA




                   corner (n.)

                   cost (v.)

                   cotton

                   cough (n.)

                   could (v.)
                                                            cy-
                   count (v.)

                   counterpart, colleague

                   country

                   course (n.)

                   court                                              :-LP 1......


                   cousin

                   cous-cous

                   cover (v.)

                   cow


                   cramps

                   cross (v.)



                                            *233*
                                                          Hosted for free on livelingua.com
    ENGLISH-HASSANIYA                                  GLOSSARY
1



    crowd (n.)                              1;


    cry

    cultivate
                                                                L"
    customer

    cut (v.)

    D


    dance (v.)

    dark
                                 ,'   tio

    date (eating) (n.)

    daughter

    dawn (n.)

    day

                                                                         ,..3..
    dead (adj.)                                                  ,J.....4-%,


    deal (n.)

    December

    decide



                         *234*
                                             Hosted for free on livelingua.com
 GLOSSARY                                ENGLISH-HASSANIYA




 deep

 dehydrated

delay (v.)

delivery

dentist
                                            *()G--.' ) `

desert (n.)                                                  NFL
desire (v. )

desk

destroy
                                                             c'
development

dialect

diarrhea

die

difference                                             L; 7t--i)
different

difficult

                                    25
                    -,      *235*
                ....,,
               .4,,,.....                         Hosted for free on livelingua.com
ENGLISH-HASSANIYA                           GLOSSARY




dig (v.)

diningroom

dinner

direct (adj.)

director

dirty

discover

dish (n.)

distance

district, region

do


doctor (m. )

dog

dollar

door

double
                             F

                    *236*
                                  Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                            256
 GLOSSARY
                                 ENGLISH-HASSANIYA




 doubt (v.)
                                                    (----z.)
down


downstairs/under

draw (v. )

dry (adj.)

dream (v.)

dress (v. )

dress (n. )

drink (n. )

drink (v.)

drive
                             fjpt              C,
driver

drought

dune

during                                                 -a
                                                    ID -1....


dust (n.)


                   *237*   257
                                      Hosted for free on livelingua.com
  ENGLISH-HASSANIYA
                                             GLOSSARY




  duty

  E


 each/every

 ear

 early

 earth

 easy

 eat

 education

egg

eggs (reproductory)

eight

eighteen

eighty

electricity

eleven



                      *238*
                              2r   Hosted for free on livelingua.com
 GLOSSARY
                                     ENGLISH-HASSANIYA




 embassy

 embroidery

 encampment

 energy

engineer (n.)

English

enough

enter

evening

every each

every/anyone

everything

eyes
                                                       .(.._,-.

example
                                                      3 ' ,..,...

expensive

extension worker



                        *239*2 5 9
                                         Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                   :.
ENGLISH-HASSANIYA                                 GLOSSARY




F


face (n.)

fact                                    k
                                  )".

factory

fair (equal)

faith

fall (v.)

family                            (-)-y,>1


famous

far

farmer

fast (v.)

fast (adj.)

fat

father

fatigue



                    *240*

                                        Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                            26v
 GLOSSARY               ENGLISH-HASSANIYA




favor (n.)

favorite

fear (v.)

February

.aces

feel (v.)

feet

fence

fertilizer
                  cif
fetus

fever

few


field
                                           3P
fifteen
                                                   1



fifty

fight (v. )


                  263
              *241*
                             Hosted for free on livelingua.com
ENGLISH-HASSANIYA                                        GLOSSARY




figure (v.)

fill (v.)

film (n.)

finally                      1           I                     j L: .(f
                                 ia--9

find (v.)

fine (well) (adj.)

finger (n.

finish (v.)

finished over

fire (n.)

first
                                                                   J-)
fish (n.)

fit (v.)

five

fix repair

flavor



                     *242*
                                             Hosted for free on livelingua.com


                                 262
 GLOSSARY
                           ENGLISH-HASSANIYA




 floor

 flower

 fly (v.)

 follow


 food

foot

for to

force (n.)

foreign

forest

forget

fork

form (n.)

forty

forward

four



             *243*
                     263         Hosted for free on livelingua.com
ENGLISH-HASSANIYA                                   GLOSSARY




fourteen

free (no cost) (adj.)

French

fresh

Friday

friend

from

front

fruit

fun
                        vyP
funny

full

function work (v. )

future

G



game




                          *244*
                                          Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                  2 C,;
GLOSSARY                         ENGLISH-HASSANIYA




gasoline

gas station

garden (n. )

gate
                           3-P Aix
general (adj.)

generator

geography

get (v.)

get in (v.)

get up

ghost

gift                                                 :k..) .,i_P


girl

give

glad

glass (drinking)



                   *245*
                           265        Hosted for free on livelingua.com
 ENGLISH-HASSANIYA                           GLOSSARY




 glasses (eye)                                         -Dill'it

 go (v.)                                                        t
                                                     (-S"'" -
 goat

 god

 gold

good,well

good-bye

goodness

government
                                                                       1
granddaughter

grandfather

grandmother

grandson

grapes

grass

grateful



                     *246*

                                   Hosted for free on livelingua.com


                             266
GLOSSARY                    ENGLISH-HA' SANIYA




green

grocery

group (n.)

grow

growth

guard (n. )

guide (n.)

gun




hair

haircut

hairdresser

half

hand (n.)

hang

happen



              *247*

                                  Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                      267
ENGLISH-HASSANIYA                               GLOSSARY




happy

hard

hat

have (v.)

have breakfast

have dinner

have lunch

head

headache

health

hear

heart

heat (n.)
                                                                 A
heavy

height
                                                         JPP
help (v.)



                    *248*



                            26-L.,
                                     Hosted for free on livelingua.com
 GLOSSARY
                          ENGLISH-HASSANIYA




 here

 high

 hill

hire

history

hit (v. )

hold (v.)

hole

holy war

home


hope (v.)

horse

hospital

hot

hotel

hour



            *249*
                    2Gb        Hosted for free on livelingua.com
ENGLISH-HASSANIYA                                                 GLOSSARY




house

how


how many

how much

however

human

humid                       L_.........L.,
                                             1/

hundred

hundred kilos

hungry

hunt

hunter

hurry (v.)

hurt (v.)

husband




                    *250*                         2 70
                                                         Hosted for free on livelingua.com
  GLOSSARY
                                   ENGLISH-HASSANIYA




  I


  I
                                                                        Irk

 ice
                                                    Ly9 7t; t
 idea                                                        ,         i
 if                                                                     ,..,


                                                                  <Ps,
 in

 important
                            L''7                       uP?.
                                                                  0.-e
                                                                  ,
 in
                                                                       ,..5

 include

increase (v.)
                                                         )-f )\
industry
                                                   ks 1..A.-v,
infection
                                                   (.1d           .).);

in front of                                                       ..


                                                   C
inh ?hitant
                                                  C.> L(-'-'
injection                                                 ,...)

                                                    jt; -)
in order to
                                                    .3                 ,
                *25.t.,""   27i
                                        Hosted for free on livelingua.com
    ENGLISH-HASSANIYA                                GLOSSARY




    insect

    insecticide

    inside
                                                                ...-...... i

 instead

 instructions

interest (n. )
                           -.4.......-e>

intestines
                                                        U,.,*       LA....9


into

iron (n. )

irrigation canal

Islam

island

it

J

January
                                                                1 L.)
Jesus



                        *252*
                                           Hosted for free on livelingua.com
 GLOSSARY                  ENGLISH-HASSANIYA




 job

 join

 joke (n.)                 /.
                      1.-,A,


 joy

juice

July

June

K


keep

kettle

key

kill (v.)

kilo

kilometer

kind (n.)

king



             *253*
                     273           Hosted for free on livelingua.com
 ENGLISH-HASSANIYA                                GLOSSARY




 kinsperson

 kiss (v. )
                      c Lo
 kitchen

knee

knife

know

Koran

L


labor (v. )

labor (birth) (n. )

laborer

lake

land (n.)

language

large

last (adj. )


                               ,2 il ,-,i   Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                       *254*
GLOSSARY                   ENGLISH-HASSANIYA




late

laugh (v. )

laundry

law
                                             yl;
lay (out) (v.)

lead (v.)

learn

least

leave

left (direction)

leg

lemon


length

less

lesson

let 6,



                   *255*            Hosted for free on livelingua.com
 ENGLISH-HASSANIYA                  GLOSSARY




 letter (mail)

 lettuce salad

 lie (tell a) (v. )

 life

 lift (v . )                                       Jl
light (v. )

lighter (n )     .




like (v )    .


                                                     Lt

line (n. )

linen

lips

listen

literature

little

live (v ).




livingroom



                      *256*   Hosted for free on livelingua.com
GLOSSARY                    ENGLISH-HASSANIYA




locust

long (adj.)

look (v.)

look at

look for

lose
                      y
lost

love (v.)

lover

low


lower (v.)
                  LP-P
lunch

lungs




                                        :1;....\...
                                                   /
machine

magazine                            ; )....% ,.P
                                          - ...'


                      277
                                    Hosted for free on livelingua.com
              *257*
ENGLISH-HASSANIYA                                       GLOSSARY




majority most of

make (v.)

malaria

malnourished                                      ti i.;63 0 )--
n an

mariner

many

map


March

mark (n.)

market
                                  -
marry                       c,_17-)

married

mat

matches

material



                    *258*                          Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                      2 "i c.)'
                                      ENGLISH-HASSANIYA
I GLOSSARY

  maternal uncle

  math                                       c_..   k., 1.....s7

                                 ,
  matter (n.)

  mattress

  May                                                    '1...L.,



  mean (v.)                                             Ls;-s

  measles

   meat

   medicine

   meet

   meeting                 As

   member

   men


   merchant

   meter

   method


                                279
                   *259*
                                                    Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                   ....
ENGLISH-HASSANIYA                        GLOSSARY




microbes

middle

midwife

might (v.)

milk (n.)

millet

million


mind (n.)
                            S
mine
                                                        eV'




minister

ministry

mint (plant)

minute (n.)

 miscarriage

 miss (v.)

 Miss



                    *260*            Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                2u
GLOSSARY                       ENGLISH-HASSANIYA




                                             _.),..,..,.)...
Mr. (Mister)

Mrs. Ms.

moderate

modern           0 ...t_e'
moment

                                     .
Monday
                                             c ')
money                                        al..6
month

moon

                                                                             i

more

morning

mosque
                        C
 mosquito

 most
                                                       ..)
 mother                                               e.' k
                                                       i
 motor


                         281
               *261*
                                         Hosted for free on livelingua.com
ENGLISH-HASSANIYA




mountain

mouse

mouth

move (v.)

movie

much

music

Muslim(s)

must (v.)

N


name (n.)

named called

napkin

 nation

 national

 natural



                    *262*
                            Hosted for free on livelingua.com
GLOSSARY                          ENGLISH- HASSANIYA




nature

nausea

near                       1



nearly

recessary
                 LS % -1->''a
neck (n.)

need (v.)

needle

neighbor

neither

never

new

news

newspaper

next

neat to/beside


                               283
                 *263*
                                            Hosted for free on livelingua.com
ENGLISH-HASSANIYA                             GLOSSARY




nice

night

                                                      1_52.)...> . S
nine

nineteen

ninety

no

none

north

nose

not

notebook

nothing-

                                                          .........p   ....%)
 notice (v.)

 November

 now


 number (n. )               AS




                    *264*        2 .i.i   Hosted for free on livelingua.com
GLOSSARY                          ENGLISH-HASSANIYA




nurse (n.)                                     :1......t.40t



nursing

nutriments                                   C_S-.1-1C


0

ocean             .J
October

of

of course

off

offer (v.)

office

officer

official

often            }....   1,..




oil (n.)

okay



             *265*              285        Hosted for free on livelingua.com
ENGLISH-HASSANIYA                      GLOSSARY




old

on


once

one

onion

only

open (v.)

open (adj.)

                                                       1
opinion                                           LC


or nor

oranges

order (n. )

other

ought                               (.5k5       (S.)

outside                                        (-5
ovary



                    *266*
                            2a;   Hosted for free on livelingua.com
GLOSSARY                          ENGLISH-HASSANIYA




over (on top of)

over finished

own (v.)

P


pack (n.)

page

pain (n.)
                            c''
paint (v. )

pair

palm tree

panties

pants

paper

parasites worms

part (n.)

party (n. )

                           287
                   *267*                  ..
                                               Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                             re




ENGLISH-HASSANIYA                                     GLOSSARY




pass (v.)

past (n.)

paternal uncle

pay (v.)

peace

Peace Corps

peanuts
                                                                 -
                                                               (....).."

pen
                                                                      .1
period (n.)                                                          0 A,'

period (menstrual)
                                     .,
people                       (...A.R..o.


pepper

perhaps

person                              "



physics

pick (choose)



                     *268*                 28 u
                                              ,   Hosted for free on livelingua.com
GLOSSARY                            ENGLISH-HASSANIYA




pick up (n.)                                           19)
picture (n.)

piece (n.)

pilgrimage

pill(s)                     c--

pillars (Muslim)

pillow

pineapple

pipe

place (n.)

placenta

plan (n.)

plant (n.)

plant (v.)

plate

platter
                           2 8 t3

                   *269*                     Hosted for free on livelingua.com
ENGLISH-HASSANIYA                                     GLOSSARY




play (v.)

pleasure (n.)

plow (v.)

plow (n.)

point (n.)

police officer

poor

population

port

position

possible

postage

post card                                                  .




post office

potatoes

pour (v.)                                                        c.....A .A44)



                            ri
                            ,-.           I
                            ,...0 t....       /
                                              1




                                                  Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                    *270*
GLOSSARY                            ENGLISH-HASSANIYA




power

practice (v.)

praise (n.)

pray
                                                                                  !



prayer                                                                            i




                                                      -,
prayer caller                                           \ 1) \


pregnancy conception

prepare

present (here) (adj.)                                      I-P

president

pretty (adj.)

prevention
                                                  s=1.) lun
price (n.)                                             Y ..
Prime Minister

probably

problem


                            2 9.j
                        *271*                 Hosted for free on livelingua.com
ENGLISH-HASSANIYA                              GLOSSARY




produce (v.)                                               e
project (n.)

promise (v.)                                               As,
prophet

protein

prove

provide (v.)

province              -et) .>)_,.


public                  (.7) 6                        } ,lr'i).
                                                           0    .,; t
pull (v.)

pump

pupil



                                                                   ,
purpose

put (v.)                                                   .J...


 R


 radio                                                   .)-1.-'',i


                    *272*           292   Hosted for free on livelingua.com
GLOSSARY                                  ENGLISH-HASSANI1 A




rain (n. )                    c-.) l.'"                              ,...-...



raise (v ).                                                   _1.50
                                                                          ..)

rake (n . )                                                  .,'1J
rat                                                              , I;

razor

razor blade

reach (v.)

read (v . )

ready (adj. )

real

realize

really
                                                                  ....)

reason (n.)                                                   C.........,...h3--.'




receive
                                                               (
                                                               /
                                                              e
record (phonograph)

red


                         293
                      *273*

                                                 Hosted for free on livelingua.com
ENGLISH-HASSANIYA                                GLOSSARY




refrigerator

refuse (v )  .




region; district

religion

remain

remember

rent (v. )

repaii fix
                        L)
repeat

reply (v . )

require

resemble                                                     1




rest (v.)

restaurant

result (n . )

resume (v . )
                            049


                    *274*
                                       Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                  'A
GLOSSARY                                     ENGLISH-HASSANIYA




return (v.)
                                                               c-"
rice

rich                    L,;           d.

ride (v.)

right (correct)

right (direction)

rise (v.)

river

road

rock

room                                                          (..L.."...J,


rope

rub (v.)

rug

rule, regulation (n.)

run (v.)
                                                            U,
                              *275*
                                       295
                                                    Hosted for free on livelingua.com
ENGLISH-HASSANIYA                           GLOSSARY




rush (v.)

S


sack

safe

salad lettuce

salt

same


sand
                       (i)
sandals

Saturday

save

saucer

Saudi                                          Cs 3 507-....1-26)

                                                            1   --
saw (n.)

say (v.)

say hello



                    *276*


                                   Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                             2j6
GLOSSARY                      ENGLISH-HASSANIYA




schedule (n.)

school                                      IMP

                                            4......) A,.


science

sea

season (n.)

seat (n.)

second

secretary

see (v.)

seem


sell

send

sentence

September

serve (food)

servant
                                                  ..\-k...0




                *277*

                        297
                                     Hosted for free on livelingua.com
ENGLISH-HASSANIYA                             GLOSSARY




service (n.)                 Jr'
set (v.)

seven                                                  9-2...)--1-)

                                                  r
seventeen

seventy

several

sex (n.)

sexual intercourse

shall

shape (n.)

share (v.)

sharp

shave (v.)

sheet (bed)

sheikh chief

ship (n.)


                     *278*


                                   Hosted for free on livelingua.com
GLOSSARY                          ENGLISH-HASSANIYA




shirt

shoe

shop (n.)

shopkeeper

short (adj. )

should (v. )

shoulder

shovel

show (v.)

shower (n. )

sick

sickness

side (n.)
                              2
sign (n.)

silk

silver



                *279*   299
                                         Hosted for free on livelingua.com
ENGLISH-HASSANIYA                            GLOSSARY




                                                       jot
simple

since

sink (kitchen)

sing

single

Sir

sister

sit

sitting room

six

sixteen

sixty

size

skin

skirt

sky



                    *280*


                            3.0   Hosted for free on livelingua.com
GLOSSARY                    ENGLISH-HASSANIYA




slacks                                   3 5_5-
sleep (v.)

slip (v.)

slow (adj.)

slowly

small


smallpox

smell (v.)
                                                 .$
smile (v.)

smoke (v.)
                                             Le'
SO
                                                      ,
soap

sock

soft

soil (n.)

sold



              *281*

                                  Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                      301
 ENGLISH-HASSANIYA
                                            GLOSSARY




 soldier
                                             is
 someone

 something

 sometimes
                                             P


 son

 song

soon

sorghum

sort (n.)

soul

sound (n.)

south

space (n. )

speak

special

spend



                     *282*
                             3.   Hosted for free on livelingua.com
GLOSSARY                        ENGLISH-HASSANIYA




sperm

spirit

spoon
                                                 L7P
spot (n.)

spring (season)

square

stamp (postage)

stand (v.)

star (sky)

start (begin)

state (nation)

station

stay (remain)

step (n.)

stick (n.)

still



                  *283*


                          303          Hosted for free on livelingua.com
ENGLISH-HASSANIYA                       GLOSSARY




stomach

stomachache

stone (n.)

stool (feces)

stop (v.)

store (n.)

storehouse

storm (n.)

story

stove

straight

strange

stream (n.)

street

strength                                               (J,
strong                                                  )-9



                    *284*
                            3
                                Hosted for free on livelingua.com
GLOSSARY                          ENGLISH-HASSANIYA




study (v.)

success

such                     3 ui ,
sudden

sugar

suit (clothes)

suitcase

summer

sun

Sunday                                                                       y




sunset

supply (v.)                                          V` '
suppose                                              _):1-2.15 \

                                                 ,        -
sure (adj.)
                                                  i           .

surprise (n.)                                        LP ..Q.0


sweet (adj.)



                 *285*

                         305
                                         Hosted for free on livelingua.com
..,


      ENGLISH-HASSANIYA                                         GLOSSARY




      system

      T

      table

      tailor

      take (v.)

      talk (v.)

      tall

      tape recorder

      taste (v.)

      teach

      tea                         .`1........,.....9



      teapot

      tear (rip) (v.)

      telegram

      telephone (n.)

      television                                                    (_,.>-4-1'.


                          *286*


                                                       Hosted for free on livelingua.com
 GLOSSARY                   ENGLISH-HASSANIYA




 tell (v.)

ten

tent

than

thank

the

then (so)

there

these

thin (adj.)

thing

think

third

thirsty

                                            .
thirty                                     CS" ->.

this



              *287*
                      307          Hosted for free on livelingua.com
ENGLISH-HASSANIYA                   GLOSSARY




those

though

thought (n.)

thousand

thread

three

through

ticket

tie (v.)

time (clock) (n.)

tip (n.)

tire (n.)

tired

to (towards)

together

tooth



                    *288*
                            Hosted for free on livelingua.com
 GLOSSARY
                           ENGLISI:-HASSANIYA




 toothache
                              &'---3-'`         -c:-,
toothbrush
                                           Li, .1.
tobacco

today

toe


toilet

tomorrow

too


top (n.)

touch (v.)

toward

towel

town

toy (n.)

trade (v.)                                        .....%


                                                 j-k..).



train (n.)
                                               LI,

                     309
             *289*

                                   Hosted for free on livelingua.com
ENGLISH-HASSANIYA                    GLOSSARY




translate

travel (v.)

tree

trip (voyage) (n.)

truck

true                                           0....p
                                                  ..4
trust (v.)

truth

try

turn (v.)

twelve

twenty

two


typewriter                   eu LO

U


umbilical cord                   iy4)' k      j-,4

                     *290*
                             Hosted for free on livelingua.com
GLOSSARY                        ENGLISH.-.1ASSANIYA




uncle

under

underpants

understand

United Nations

university

until

up

upon

upstairs/above

urine

use (v. )

usually                                               o.)

uterus

V


vagina



                 *291*   31 i
                                      Hosted for free on livelingua.com
ENGLISH-HASSANIYA                           GLOSSARY




valley

value (n. )

vegetables

very

view (n. )

village

visit (v.)

vitamins

voice (n. )

volunteer (n. )

w


wagon

wait (v.)

wake up (v. )

walk (v.)

wall


                            00
                             A,
                    *292*
                                  Hosted for free on livelingua.com
GLOSSARY                             ENGLISH-IIASSANIYA




wallet

want (v.)

war (n.)                  sal.tAs:


warm


wash (v.)

batch (v.)

watch (wrist)

water (n.)

wave (sea) (n.)

way (road)

wear (clothes) (v.)

weather

Wednesday

weeds
                                                      t-t4si
week
                                                   L),\
weight                                                3 ;2
                          313
                      *293*
                                           Hosted for free on livelingua.com
ENGLISH-HASSANIYA                           GLOSSARY




well (water)

well good

west

wet

what

wheat

when (question word)

where (question word)

whether

which (question word)

while

white

who (question word)

who (relative pronoun)

whole

whooping cough



                         *294*
                                 Hosted for free on livelingua.com
GLOSSARY                            ENGLISH-HASSANIYA




why (question word)

wide

wife

will (shall)

wind (breeze)

window


wine

winter

wish (v.)

with
                                                           C
within

without

Wolof


woman


wonder (v.)
                                            CS'

wonderful


                      *295*   315
                                          Hosted for free on livelingua.com
ENGLISH-HASSANIYA                                  GLOSSARY




wood


wool


word

work (v ).




work; job (n )

world
                 .

                             y
World Bank
                                        & , ;.' \           .---'i I
worms parasites

worst
                                                    L51 ) ;.)
worth (v. )

would (v . )

wound (n )   .




write (v )
         .




wrong (adj . )                                                 ,.....1.:_c




                     *296*   3. G
                                    Hosted for free on livelingua.com
GLOSSARY                        ENGLISH-HASSANIYA




Y


yard (measure)

year

yellow

yes
                            e
Yes! (by God!)

yesterday

yet

yoke

you (m.)                                            .
                                                     <-:.,.).* k



you (f.)

young                      c.

Z


zero

zipper




                  .      317
                 *297*
                                    Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                      IDIOMS AND EXPRESSIONS


A

                           (......A.Its
All right, OK                                                       \
                                                                        , )_
                                                                               \
Anything els..?
                                                                 (i) \     ,
B


By God!
By the way


D


Don't interrupt, let me continue
Day after tomorrow (the)
                                               , ol"
                                               t                    1I''!


E


Excuse me? pardon me?              9 Li\       L



F


From time to time                                           -0 >          0";
Fine                          c.....04...0.,




                                                   Hosted for free on livelingua.com
G



Give me                                     .>)

Give me a little more
                                                  LS             (5'
God willing                                                ANA c..L1 bo
Good-bye                    ki.1                           yk_)1J%

Good afternoon
Good morning


H


Happy Holiday!                                         J               A-Lc

Happy New Year!
                                                                ,15
Hello                                ./tP
Here you are, here you go
Hey     (name)   !




How are you?                           f                   I! 9        -5 t)_

How do you say that in Hassaniya?             I`P
How long have you been
How much is this?                                                  c)')'
How old are you?
How's the weather?                                     1)-\e




                                   *299*


                                                           Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                      319
I


I can't
I don't understand
I forgot
I have a headache
I have a stomach ache
I'm glad to meet you
Isn't that so? It's certainly true.
It doesn't work
It doesn't matter


L


Last month
Last week
Last year
Leave me alone
Like this


N


Never mind
New Year
1Text month
Next year
Next week



                                  *300*


                                              Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                      3 2.0
0

Of coui.se
Okay, all right
"Our house is your house"


P


Pardon me? Excuse me?
Please


S



Say, tell me, by the way
Slowly

Something like this
Straight ahead
                                        3            (5-:-)

                               01-,31   J ,)-1

T


Tell me...
Thank you
Thank God!
That's all, enough
There isn't any
This is very important
To the left
To the right


                            *301*


                                        Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                            321
W



Wait a bit
What does that mean?
What time is it?
What's going on? (happening)
What's that?
What's the news?
What's wrong with you?
Where is...


Y


Yes




                         41-4ama'u 1-illai: "Praise to God"


                                                                   GPO 868-149


                                       *302*

                                                 0 .--. 0     Hosted for free on livelingua.com
                                                 0 4:. 4
            PEACE CORPS
LANGUAGE HANDBOOK SERIES
             for Kiribati (Gilbertese)

          Grammar Handbook.
     Communication & Culture Handbook
         Special Skills Handbook
          Teacher's Handbook




            ACTION/Peace Corps
   The Experiment in International Living                               i



  "Communication is the key to understanding."




                                    Hosted for free on livelingua.com
